
The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Cosmic Computer, by Henry Beam Piper

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Cosmic Computer

Author: Henry Beam Piper

Release Date: May 23, 2007 [EBook #20727]
[This file was first posted on March 3, 2007]
[Last updated: June 14, 2012]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COSMIC COMPUTER ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Bethanne M. Simms, Jason Isbell, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net









+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| Transcriber's Note:                                          |
|                                                              |
| Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the     |
| U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.              |
+--------------------------------------------------------------+




THE COSMIC COMPUTER
by
H BEAM PIPER


"There are incredible things still
undiscovered; most of the important installations were built in
duplicate as a precaution against space attack. I know where all of
them are.

"But I could find nothing, not one single word, about any giant
strategic planning computer called Merlin!"


Nevertheless the leading men of the planet didn't believe him. They
couldn't, for the search for Merlin had become their abiding
obsession. Merlin meant everything to them: power, pleasures, and
profits unlimited.

Conn had known they'd never believe him, and so he had a trick or two
up his space-trained sleeve that might outwit even their fabled Cosmic
Computer ... if they dared accept his challenge.

_H. BEAM PIPER_ is rather enigmatic where his personal statistics are
concerned. It may be stated that he lives in Williamsport,
Pennsylvania, that he is an expert on the history and use of hand
weapons, that he has been writing and selling science-fiction for many
years to the leading magazines, and that he is highly rated among
readers for his skill and imagination. He has had several novels
published, including mysteries and juveniles.

His previous appearances in Ace Books include two novels written in
collaboration with John J. McGuire: CRISIS IN 2140 (D-227) and A
PLANET FOR TEXANS (D-299), and a longer entirely self-authored novel
SPACE VIKING (F-225).

THE COSMIC COMPUTER

(Original Title: Junkyard Planet)

H. BEAM PIPER

ACE BOOKS, INC.

1120 Avenue of the Americas

New York, N.Y. 10036

THE COSMIC COMPUTER (JUNKYARD PLANET)


Copyright, 1963, by H. Beam Piper


An Ace Book, by arrangement with G. P. Putnam's Sons


All Rights Reserved


Printed in U.S.A.




I


Thirty minutes to Litchfield.

Conn Maxwell, at the armor-glass front of the observation deck,
watched the landscape rush out of the horizon and vanish beneath the
ship, ten thousand feet down. He thought he knew how an hourglass must
feel with the sand slowly draining out.

It had been six months to Litchfield when the _Mizar_ lifted out of La
Plata Spaceport and he watched Terra dwindle away. It had been two
months to Litchfield when he boarded the _City of Asgard_ at the port
of the same name on Odin. It had been two hours to Litchfield when the
_Countess Dorothy_ rose from the airship dock at Storisende. He had
had all that time, and now it was gone, and he was still unprepared
for what he must face at home.

Thirty minutes to Litchfield.

The words echoed in his mind as though he had spoken them aloud, and
then, realizing that he never addressed himself as sir, he turned. It
was the first mate.

He had a clipboard in his hand, and he was wearing a Terran Federation
Space Navy uniform of forty years, or about a dozen regulation-changes,
ago. Once Conn had taken that sort of thing for granted. Now it was
obtruding upon him everywhere.

"Thirty minutes to Litchfield, sir," the first officer repeated, and
gave him the clipboard to check the luggage list. Valises, two;
trunks, two; microbook case, one. The last item fanned a small flicker
of anger, not at any person, not even at himself, but at the whole
infernal situation. He nodded.

"That's everything. Not many passengers left aboard, are there?"

"You're the only one, first class, sir. About forty farm laborers on
the lower deck." He dismissed them as mere cargo. "Litchfield's the
end of the run."

"I know. I was born there."

The mate looked again at his name on the list and grinned.

"Sure; you're Rodney Maxwell's son. Your father's been giving us a lot
of freight lately. I guess I don't have to tell you about Litchfield."

"Maybe you do. I've been away for six years. Tell me, are they having
labor trouble now?"

"Labor trouble?" The mate was surprised. "You mean with the
farm-tramps? Ten of them for every job, if you call that trouble."

"Well, I noticed you have steel gratings over the gangway heads to the
lower deck, and all your crewmen are armed. Not just pistols, either."

"Oh. That's on account of pirates."

"Pirates?" Conn echoed.

"Well, I guess you'd call them that. A gang'll come aboard, dressed
like farm-tramps; they'll have tommy guns and sawed-off shotguns in
their bindles. When the ship's airborne and out of reach of help,
they'll break out their guns and take her. Usually kill all the crew
and passengers. They don't like to leave live witnesses," the mate
said. "You heard about the _Harriet Barne_, didn't you?"

She was Transcontinent & Overseas, the biggest contragravity ship on
the planet.

"They didn't pirate her, did they?"

The mate nodded. "Six months ago; Blackie Perales' gang. There was
just a tag end of a radio call, that ended in a shot. Time the Air
Patrol got to her estimated position it was too late. Nobody's ever
seen ship, officers, crew or passengers since."

"Well, great Ghu; isn't the Government doing anything about it?"

"Sure. They offered a big reward for the pirates, dead or alive. And
there hasn't been a single case of piracy inside the city limits of
Storisende," he added solemnly.

The Calder Range had grown to a sharp blue line on the horizon ahead,
and he could see the late afternoon sun on granite peaks. Below, the
fields were bare and brown, and the woods were autumn-tinted. They had
been green with new foliage when he had last seen them, and the
wine-melon fields had been in pink blossom. Must have gotten the crop
in early, on this side of the mountains. Maybe they were still
harvesting, over in the Gordon Valley. Or maybe this gang below was
going to the wine-pressing. Now that he thought of it, he'd seen a lot
of cask staves going aboard at Storisende.

Yet there seemed to be less land under cultivation now than six years
ago. He could see squares of bracken and low brush that had been melon
fields recently, among the new forests that had grown up in the past
forty years. The few stands of original timber towered above the
second growth like hills; those trees had been there when the planet
had been colonized.

That had been two hundred years ago, at the beginning of the Seventh
Century, Atomic Era. The name "Poictesme" told that--Surromanticist
Movement, when they were rediscovering James Branch Cabell. Old Genji
Gartner, the scholarly and half-piratical space-rover whose ship had
been the first to enter the Trisystem, had been devoted to the
romantic writers of the Pre-Atomic Era. He had named all the planets
of the Alpha System from the books of Cabell, and those of Beta from
Spenser's _Faerie Queene_, and those of Gamma from Rabelais. Of
course, the camp village at his first landing site on this one had
been called Storisende.

Thirty years later, Genji Gartner had died there, after seeing
Storisende grow to a metropolis and Poictesme become a Member Republic
in the Terran Federation. The other planets were uninhabitable except
in airtight dome cities, but they were rich in minerals. Companies had
been formed to exploit them. No food could be produced on any of them
except by carniculture and hydroponic farming, and it had been cheaper
to produce it naturally on Poictesme. So Poictesme had concentrated on
agriculture and had prospered. At least, for about a century.

Other colonial planets were developing their own industries; the
manufactured goods the Gartner Trisystem produced could no longer find
a profitable market. The mines and factories on Jurgen and Koshchei,
on Britomart and Calidore, on Panurge and the moons of Pantagruel
closed, and the factory workers went away. On Poictesme, the offices
emptied, the farms contracted, forests reclaimed fields, and the wild
game came back.

Coming toward the ship out of the east, now, was a vast desert of
crumbling concrete--landing fields and parade grounds, empty barracks
and toppling sheds, airship docks, stripped gun emplacements and
missile-launching sites. These were more recent, and dated from
Poictesme's second hectic prosperity, when the Gartner Trisystem had
been the advance base for the Third Fleet-Army Force, during the
System States War.

It had lasted twelve years. Millions of troops were stationed on or
routed through Poictesme. The mines and factories reopened for war
production. The Federation spent trillions on trillions of sols, piled
up mountains of supplies and equipment, left the face of the world
cluttered with installations. Then, without warning, the System States
Alliance collapsed, the rebellion ended, and the scourge of peace fell
on Poictesme.

The Federation armies departed. They took the clothes they stood in,
their personal weapons, and a few souvenirs. Everything else was
abandoned. Even the most expensive equipment had been worth less than
the cost of removal.

The people who had grown richest out of the War had followed, taking
their riches with them. For the next forty years, those who remained
had been living on leavings. On Terra, Conn had told his friends that
his father was a prospector, leaving them to interpret that as one who
searched, say, for uranium. Rodney Maxwell found quite a bit of
uranium, but he got it by taking apart the warheads of missiles.

Now he was looking down on the granite spines of the Calder Range;
ahead the misty Gordon Valley sloped and widened to the north. Twenty
minutes to Litchfield, now. He still didn't know what he was going to
tell the people who would be waiting for him. No; he knew that; he
just didn't know how. The ship swept on, ten miles a minute, tearing
through thin puffs of cloud. Ten minutes. The Big Bend was glistening
redly in the sunlit haze, but Litchfield was still hidden inside its
curve. Six. Four. The _Countess Dorothy_ was losing speed and
altitude. Now he could see it, first a blur and then distinctly. The
Airlines Building, so thick as to look squat for all its height. The
yellow block of the distilleries under their plume of steam. High
Garden Terrace; the Mall.

Moment by moment, the stigmata of decay became more evident. Terraces
empty or littered with rubbish; gardens untended and choked with wild
growth; blank-staring windows, walls splotched with lichens. At first,
he was horrified at what had happened to Litchfield in six years. Then
he realized that the change had been in himself. He was seeing it with
new eyes, as it really was.

The ship came in five hundred feet above the Mall, and he could see
cracked pavements sprouting grass, statues askew on their pedestals,
waterless fountains. At first he thought one of them was playing, but
what he had taken for spray was dust blowing from the empty basin.
There was a thing about dusty fountains, some poem he'd read at the
University.

_The fountains are dusty in the Graveyard of Dreams;
The hinges are rusty, they swing with tiny screams._

Was Poictesme a Graveyard of Dreams? No; Junkyard of Empire. The
Terran Federation had impoverished a hundred planets, devastated a
score, actually depopulated at least three, to keep the System States
Alliance from seceding. It hadn't been a victory. It had only been a
lesser defeat.

There was a crowd, almost a mob, on the dock; nearly everybody in
topside Litchfield. He spotted old Colonel Zareff, with his white hair
and plum-brown skin, and Tom Brangwyn, the town marshal, red-faced and
bulking above everybody else. Kurt Fawzi, the mayor, well to the
front. Then he saw his father and mother, and his sister Flora, and
waved to them. They waved back, and then everybody was waving. The
gangway-port opened, and the Academy band struck up, enthusiastically
if inexpertly, as he descended to the dock.

His father was wearing a black suit with a long coat, cut to the same
pattern as the one he had worn six years ago. Blackout curtain cloth.
It was fairly new, but the coat had begun to acquire a permanent
wrinkle across the right hip, over the pistol butt. His mother's dress
was new, and so was Flora's, made for the occasion. He couldn't be
sure just which of the Federation Armed Forces had provided the
material, but his father's shirt was Med Service sterilon.

Ashamed to be noticing things like that, he clasped his father's hand,
kissed his mother, embraced his sister. There were a few, but very
few, gray threads in his father's mustache; a few more squint-wrinkles
around the eyes. His mother's hair was all gray, now, and she was
heavier. She seemed shorter, but that would be because he'd grown a
few inches in the last six years. For a moment, he was surprised that
Flora actually looked younger. Then he realized that to seventeen,
twenty-three is practically middle age, but to twenty-three,
twenty-nine is almost contemporary. He noticed the glint on her left
hand and caught it to look at the ring.

"Hey! Zarathustra sunstone! Nice," he said. "Where is he, Sis?"

He'd never met her fiance; Wade Lucas hadn't come to Litchfield to
practice medicine until the year after he'd gone to Terra.

"Oh, emergency," Flora said. "Obstetrical case; that won't wait on
anything. In Tramptown, of course. But he'll be at the party.... Oops,
I shouldn't have said that; that's supposed to be a surprise."

"Don't worry; I'll be surprised," he promised.

Then Kurt Fawzi was pushing forward, holding out his hand. Thinner,
and grayer, but just as effusive as ever.

"Welcome home, Conn. Judge, shake hands with him and tell him how glad
we all are to see him back.... Now, Franz, put away the recorder; save
the interview for the _Chronicle_ till later. Ah, Professor Kellton;
one pupil Litchfield Academy can be proud of!"

He shook hands with them: Judge Ledue, Franz Veltrin, old Professor
Dolf Kellton. They were all happy; how much, he wondered, because he
was Conn Maxwell, Rodney Maxwell's son, home from Terra, and how much
because of what they hoped he'd tell them. Kurt Fawzi, edging him
aside, was the first to speak of it.

"Conn, what did you find out?" he whispered. "Do you know where it
is?"

He stammered, then saw Tom Brangwyn and Colonel Klem Zareff
approaching, the older man tottering on a silver-headed cane and the
younger keeping pace with him. Neither of them had been born on
Poictesme. Tom Brangwyn had always been reticent about where he came
from, but Hathor was a good guess. There had been political trouble on
Hathor twenty years ago; the losers had had to get off-planet in a
hurry to dodge firing squads. Klem Zareff never was reticent about his
past. He came from Ashmodai, one of the System States planets, and he
had commanded a regiment, and finally a division that had been blasted
down to less than regimental strength, in the Alliance Army. He always
wore a little rosette of System States black and green on his coat.

"Hello, boy," he croaked, extending a hand. "Good to see you again."

"It sure is, Conn," the town marshal agreed, then lowered his voice.
"Find out anything definite?"

"We didn't have much time, Conn," Kurt Fawzi said, "but we've
arranged a little celebration for you. We'll start it with a dinner at
Senta's."

"You couldn't have done anything I'd have liked better, Mr. Fawzi. I'd
have to have a meal at Senta's before I'd really feel at home."

"Well, it'll be a couple of hours. Suppose we all go up to my office,
in the meantime. Give the ladies a chance to fix up for the party, and
have a little drink and a talk together."

"You want to do that, Conn?" his father asked. There was an odd
undernote of anxiety, or reluctance, in his voice.

"Yes, of course. I'd like that."

His father turned to speak to his mother and Flora. Kurt Fawzi was
speaking to his wife, interrupting himself to shout instructions to
some laborers who were bringing up a contragravity skid. Conn turned
to Colonel Zareff.

"Good melon crop this year?" he asked.

The old Rebel cursed. "Gehenna of a big crop; we're up to our necks in
melons. This time next year we'll be washing our feet in brandy."

"Hold onto it and age it; you ought to see what they charge for a
drink of Poictesme brandy on Terra."

"This isn't Terra, and we aren't selling it by the drink," Colonel
Zareff said. "We're selling it at Storisende Spaceport, for what the
freighter captains pay us. You've been away too long, Conn. You've
forgotten what it's like to live in a poor-house."

The cargo was coming off, now. Cask staves, and more cask staves.
Zareff swore bitterly at the sight, and then they started toward the
wide doors of the shipping floor, inside the Airlines Building.
Outgoing cargo was beginning to come out; casks of brandy, of course,
and a lot of boxes and crates, painted light blue and bearing the
yellow trefoil of the Third Fleet-Army Force and the eight-pointed red
star of Ordnance. Cases of rifles; square boxes of ammunition; crated
auto-cannon. Conn turned to his father.

"This our stuff?" he asked. "Where did you dig it?"

Rodney Maxwell laughed. "You know the old Tenth Army Headquarters,
over back of Snagtooth, in the Calders? Everybody knows that was
cleaned out years ago. Well, always take a second look at these
things everybody knows. Ten to one they're not so. It always bothered
me that nobody found any underground attack-shelters. I took a second
look, and sure enough, I found them, right underneath, mined out of
the solid rock. Conn, you'd be surprised at what I found there."

"Where are you going to sell that stuff?" he asked, pointing at a
passing skid. "There's enough combat equipment around now to outfit a
private army for every man, woman and child in Poictesme."

"Storisende Spaceport. The freighter captains buy it, and sell it on
some of the planets that were colonized right before the War and
haven't gotten industrialized yet. I'm clearing about two hundred sols
a ton on it."

The skid at which he had pointed was loaded with cases of M504
submachine guns. Even used, one was worth fifty sols. Allowing for
packing weight, his father was selling those tommy guns for less than
a good cafe on Terra got for one drink of Poictesme brandy.




II


He had been in Kurt Fawzi's office before, once or twice, with his
father; he remembered it as a dim, quiet place of genteel conviviality
and rambling conversation. None of the lights were bright, and the
walls were almost invisible in the shadows. As they entered, Tom
Brangwyn went to the long table and took off his belt and holster,
laying it down. One by one, the others unbuckled their weapons and
added them to the pile. Klem Zareff's cane went on the table with his
pistol; there was a sword inside it.

That was something else he was seeing with new eyes. He hadn't started
carrying a gun when he had left for Terra, and he was wondering, now,
why any of them bothered to. Why, there wouldn't be a shooting a year
in Litchfield, if you didn't count the Tramptowners, and they stayed
south of the docks and off the top level.

Or perhaps that was just it. Litchfield was peaceful because
everybody was prepared to keep it that way. It certainly wasn't
because of anything the Planetary Government did to maintain order.

Now Brangwyn was setting out glasses, filling a pitcher from a keg in
the corner of the room. The last time Conn had been here, they'd given
him a glass of wine, and he'd felt very grown-up because they didn't
water it for him.

"Well, gentlemen," Kurt Fawzi was saying, "let's have a toast to our
returned friend and new associate. Conn, we're all anxious to hear
what you've found out, but even if you didn't learn anything, we're
still happy to have you back with us. Gentlemen; to our friend and
neighbor. Welcome home, Conn!"

"Well, it's wonderful to be back, Mr. Fawzi," he began.

"Here, none of this mister foolishness; you're one of us, now, Conn.
And drink up, everybody. We have plenty of brandy, if we don't have
anything else."

"You can say that again, Kurt." That was one of the distillery people;
he'd remember the name in a moment. "When this new crop gets pressed
and fermented...."

"I don't know where in Gehenna I'm going to vat mine till it
ferments," Klem Zareff said.

"Or why," another planter added. "Lorenzo, what are you going to be
paying for wine?"

Lorenzo Menardes; that was the name. The distiller said he was
worrying about what he'd be able to get for brandy.

"Oh, please," Fawzi interrupted. "Not today; not when our boy's home
and is going to tell us how we can solve all our problems."

"Yes, Conn." That was Morgan Gatworth, the lawyer. "You did find out
where Merlin is, didn't you?"

That set them all off. He was still holding his drink; he downed it in
one gulp, barely tasting it, and handed the glass to Tom Brangwyn for
a refill, and caught a frown on his father's face. One did not gulp
drinks in Kurt Fawzi's office.

Well, neither did one blast everybody's hopes with half a dozen words,
and that was what he was trying to force himself to do. He wanted to
blurt out the one quick sentence and get it over with, but the words
wouldn't come out of his throat. He lowered the second drink by half;
the brandy was beginning to warm him and dissolve the cold lump in his
stomach. Have to go easy, though. He wasn't used to this kind of
drinking, and he wanted to stay sober enough to talk sense until he'd
told them what he had to.

"I hope," he said, "that you don't expect me to show you the cross on
the map, where the computer is buried."

All the eyes around him began to look troubled. Most of them had been
expecting precisely that. His father was watching him anxiously.

"But it's still here on Poictesme, isn't it?" one of the melon
planters asked. "They didn't take it away with them?"

"Most of you gentlemen," he said, "contributed to sending me to school
on Terra, to study cybernetics and computer theory. It wouldn't do us
any good to find Merlin if none of us could operate it. Well, I've
done that. I can use any known type of computer, and train assistants.
After I graduated, I was offered a junior instructorship to computer
physics at the University."

"You didn't mention that, son," his father said.

"The letter would have come on the same ship I did. Besides, I didn't
think it was very important."

"I think it is." There was a catch in old Dolf Kellton's voice. "One
of my boys from the Academy offered a place on the faculty of the
University of Montevideo, on Terra!" He finished his drink and held
out his glass for more, something he almost never did.

"Conn means," Kurt Fawzi explained, "that it had nothing to do with
Merlin."

All right; now tell them the truth.

"I was also to find out anything I could about a secret giant computer
used during the War by the Third Fleet-Army Force, code-named Merlin.
I went over all the records available to the public; I used your
letter, Professor, and the head of our Modern History department
secured me access to non-public material, some of it still classified.
For one thing, I have locations and maps and plans of every Federation
installation built here between 842 and 854, the whole period of the
War." He turned to his father. "There are incredible things still
undiscovered; most of the important installations were built in
duplicate, sometimes triplicate, as a precaution against space attack.
I know where all of them are."

"Space attack!" Klem Zareff was indignant. "There never was a time we
could have attacked Poictesme. Even if we'd had the ships, we were
fighting a purely defensive war. Aggression was no part of our
policy--"

He interrupted: "Excuse me, Colonel. The point I was trying to make is
that, with all I was able to learn, I could find nothing, not one
single word, about any giant strategic planning computer called
Merlin, or any Merlin Project."

There! He'd gotten that out. Now go on and tell them about the old man
in the dome-house on Luna. The room was silent, except for the small
insectile hum of the electric clock. Then somebody set a glass on the
table, and it sounded like a hammer blow.

"Nothing, Conn?"

Kurt Fawzi was incredulous. Judge Ledue's hand shook as though palsied
as he tried to relight his cigar. Dolf Kellton was looking at the
drink in his hand as though he had no idea what it was. The others
found their voices, one by one.

"Of course, it was the most closely guarded secret ..."

"But after forty years ..."

"Hah, don't tell me about security!" Colonel Zareff barked. "You
should have seen the lengths our staff went to. I remember, once, on
Mephistopheles ..."

"But there _was_ a computer code-named Merlin," Judge Ledue was
insisting, to convince himself more than anybody else. "Its
memory-bank contained all human knowledge. It was capable of scanning
all its data instantaneously, and combining, and forming associations,
and reasoning with absolute accuracy, and extrapolating to produce new
facts, and predicting future events, and ..."

And if you'd asked such a computer, "Is there a God?" it would have
simply answered, "Present."

"We'd have won the War, except for Merlin," Zareff was declaring.

"Conn, from what you've learned of computers generally, how big would
Merlin have to be?" old Professor Kellton asked.

"Well, the astrophysics computer at the University occupied a volume
of a hundred thousand cubic feet. For all Merlin was supposed to do,
I'd say something of the order of three million to five million.

"Well, it's a cinch they didn't haul that away with them," Lester
Dawes, the banker, said.

"Oh, lots of places on Poictesme where they could have hid a thing
like that," Tom Brangwyn said. "You know, a planet's a mighty big
place."

"It doesn't have to be on Poictesme, even," Morgan Gatworth pointed
out. "It could be anywhere in the Trisystem."

"You know where I'd have put it?" Lorenzo Menardes asked. "On one of
the moons of Pantagruel."

"But that's in the Gamma System, three light years away," Kurt Fawzi
objected. "There isn't a hypership on this planet, and it would take
half a lifetime to get there on normal-space drive."

Conn was lifting his glass to his lips. He set it down again and rose
to his feet.

"Then," he said, "we will build a hypership. On Koshchei there are
shipyards and hyperdrive engines and everything we will need. We only
need one normal-space interplanetary ship to get out there, and we're
in business."

"Well, I don't know we need one," Judge Ledue said. "That was only an
idea of Lorenzo's. I think Merlin's right here on Poictesme."

"We don't know it is," Conn replied. "And we don't know we won't need
a ship. Merlin may be on Koshchei; that's where the components would
be fabricated, and the Armed Forces weren't hauling anything any
farther than they had to. Koshchei's only two and a half minutes away
by radio; that's practically in the next room. Look; here's how they
could have done it."

He went on talking, about remote controls and radio transmission and
positronic brains and neutrino-circuits. They believed it all, even
the little they understood. They would believe anything he told them
about Merlin--except the truth.

"But this will take money," Lester Dawes said. "And after that
infernal deluge of unsecured paper currency thirty years ago ..."

"I have no doubt," Judge Ledue began, "that the Planetary Government
at Storisende would give assistance. I have some slight influence with
President Vyckhoven ..."

"Huh-_uh_!" That was one of Klem Zareff's fellow planters. "We don't
want Jake Vyckhoven or any of this First-Families-of-Storisende
oligarchy in this at all. That's the gang that bankrupted the
Government with doles and work relief, and everybody else with
worthless printing-press money after the War, and they've been
squatting in a circle deploring things ever since. Some of these days
Blackie Perales and his pirates'll sack Storisende, for all they'd be
able to do to stop him."

"We get a ship out to Koshchei, and the next thing you know we'll be
the Planetary Government," Tom Brangwyn said.

Rodney Maxwell finished the brandy in his glass and set it on the
table, then went to the pile of belts and holsters and began rummaging
for his own. Kurt Fawzi looked up in surprise.

"Rod, you're not leaving are you?" he asked.

"Yes. It's only half an hour till time for dinner, and I think Conn
and I ought to have a little fresh air. Besides, you know, we haven't
seen each other for six years." He buckled on the heavy automatic and
settled the belt over his hips. "You didn't have a gun, did you,
Conn?" he asked. "Well, let's go."




III


It wasn't until they were down to the main level and outside in the
little plaza to the east of the Airlines Building that his father
broke the silence.

"That was quite a talk you gave them, Conn. They believed every word
of it. I even caught myself starting to believe it once or twice."

Conn stopped short; his father halted beside him. "Why didn't you tell
them the truth, son?" Rodney Maxwell asked.

The question, which he had been throwing at himself, angered him. "Why
didn't I just grab a couple of pistols and shoot the lot of them?" he
retorted. "It wouldn't have killed them any deader, and it wouldn't
have hurt as much."

"There is no Merlin. Is that it?"

He realized, suddenly, that his father had known, or suspected that
all along. He started to say something, then checked himself and began
again:

"There never was one. I was going to tell them, but you saw them. I
couldn't."

"You're sure of it?"

"The whole thing's a myth. I'm quoting the one man in the Galaxy who
ought to know. The man who commanded the Third Force here during the
War."

"Foxx Travis!" His father's voice was soft with wonder. "I saw him
once, when I was eight years old. I thought he'd died long ago. Why,
he must be over a hundred."

"A hundred and twelve. He's living on Luna; low gravity's all that
keeps him alive."

"And you talked to him?"

"Yes."

There'd been a girl in his third-year biophysics class; he'd found out
that she was a great-granddaughter of Force General Travis. It had
taken him until his senior midterm vacation to wangle an invitation to
the dome-house on Luna. After that, it had been easy. As soon as Foxx
Travis had learned that one of his great-granddaughter's guests was
from Poictesme, he had insisted on talking to him.

"What did he tell you?"

The old man had been incredibly thin and frail. Under normal
gravitation, his life would have gone out like a blown match. Even at
one-sixth G, it had cost him effort to rise and greet the guest. There
had been a younger man, a mere stripling of seventy-odd; he had been
worried, and excused himself at once. Travis had laughed after he had
gone out.

"Mike Shanlee; my aide-de-camp on Poictesme. Now he thinks he's my
keeper. He'll have a squad of doctors and a platoon of nurses in here
as soon as you're gone, so take your time. Now, tell me how things are
on Poictesme...."

"Just about that," he told his father. "I finally mentioned Merlin, as
an old legend people still talked about. I was ashamed to admit
anybody really believed in it. He laughed, and said, 'Great Ghu, is
that thing still around? Well, I suppose so; it was all through the
Third Force during the War. Lord only knows how these rumors start
among troops. We never contradicted it; it was good for morale.'"

They had started walking again, and were out on the Mall; the sky was
flaming red and orange from high cirrus clouds in the sunset light.
They stopped by a dry fountain, perhaps the one from which he had seen
the dust blowing. Rodney Maxwell sat down on the edge of the basin and
got out two cigars, handing one to Conn, who produced his lighter.

"Conn, they wouldn't have believed you _and_ Foxx Travis," he said.
"Merlin's a religion with those people. Merlin's a robot god,
something they can shove all their problems onto. As soon as they find
Merlin, everybody will be rich and happy, the Government bonds will be
redeemed at face value plus interest, the paper money'll be worth a
hundred Federation centisols to the sol, and the leaves and wastepaper
will be raked off the Mall, all by magic." He muttered an
unprintability and laughed bitterly.

"I didn't know you were the village atheist, Father."

"In a religious community, the village atheist keeps his doubts to
himself. I have to do business with these Merlinolators. It's all I
can do to keep Flora from antagonizing them at school."

Flora was a teacher; now she was assistant principal of the grade
schools. Professor Kellton was also school superintendent. He could
see how that would be.

"Flora's not a True Believer, then?"

Rodney Maxwell shook his head. "That's largely Wade Lucas's influence,
I'd say. You know about him."

Just from letters. Wade Lucas was from Baldur; he'd gone off-planet
as soon as he'd gotten his M.D. Evidently the professional situation
there was the same as on Terra; plenty of opportunities, and fifty
competitors for each one. On Poictesme, there were few opportunities,
but nobody competed for anything, not even to find Merlin.

"He'd never heard of Merlin till he came here, and when he did, he
just couldn't believe in it. I don't blame him. I've heard about it
all my life, and I can't."

"Why not?"

"To begin with, I suppose, because it's just another of these things
everybody believes. Then, I've had to do some studying on the Third
Force occupation of Poictesme to know where to go and dig, and I never
found any official, or even reliably unofficial, mention of anything
of the sort. Forty years is a long time to keep a secret, you know.
And I can't see why they didn't come back for it after the pressure to
get the troops home was off, or why they didn't build a dozen Merlins.
This isn't the only planet that has problems they can't solve for
themselves."

"What's Mother's attitude on Merlin?"

"She's against it. She thinks it isn't right to make machines that are
smarter than people."

"I'll agree. It's scientifically impossible."

"That's what I've been trying to tell her. Conn, I noticed that after
Kurt Fawzi started talking about how long it would take to get to the
Gamma System, you jumped right into it and began talking up a ship.
Did you think that if you got them started on that it would take their
minds off Merlin?"

"That gang up in Fawzi's office? Nifflheim, no! They'll go on hunting
Merlin till they die. But I was serious about the ship. An idea hit
me. You gave it to me; you and Klem Zareff."

"Why, I didn't say a word ..."

"Down on the shipping floor, before we went up. You were talking about
selling arms and ammunition at a profit of two hundred sols a ton, and
Klem was talking as though a bumper crop was worse than a Green Death
epidemic. If we had a hypership, look what we could do. How much do
you think a settler on Hoth or Malebolge or Irminsul would pay for a
good rifle and a thousand rounds? How much would he pay for his
life?--that's what it would come to. And do you know what a fifteen-cc
liqueur glass of Poictesme brandy sells for on Terra? One sol;
Federation money. I'll admit it costs like Nifflheim to run a
hypership, but look at the difference between what these tramp
freighter captains pay at Storisende and what they get."

"I've been looking at it for a long time. Maybe if we had a few ships
of our own, these planters would be breaking new ground instead of
cutting their plantings, and maybe we'd get some money on this planet
that was worth something. You have a good idea there, son. But maybe
there's an angle to it you haven't thought of."

Conn puffed slowly at the cigar. Why couldn't they grow tobacco like
this on Terra? Soil chemicals, he supposed; that wasn't his subject.

"You can't put this scheme over on its own merits. This gang wouldn't
lift a finger to build a hypership. They've completely lost hope in
everything but Merlin."

"Well, can do. I'll even convince them that Merlin's a space-station,
in orbit off Koshchei. I think I could do that."

"You know what it'll cost? If you go ahead with it, I'm in it with
you, make no mistake about that. But you and I will be the only two
people on Poictesme who can be trusted with the truth. We'll have to
lie to everybody else, with every word we speak. We'll have to lie to
Flora, and we'll have to lie to your mother. Your mother most of all.
She believes in absolutes. Lying is absolutely wrong, no matter whom
it helps; telling the truth is absolutely right, no matter how much
damage it does or how many hearts it breaks. You think this is going
to be worth a price like that?"

"Don't you?" he demanded, and then pointed along the crumbling and
littered Mall. "Look at that. Pretend you never saw it before and are
looking at it for the first time. And then tell me whether it'll be
worth it or not."

His father took a cigar from his mouth. For a moment, he sat staring
silently.

"Great Ghu!" Rodney Maxwell turned. "I wonder how that sneaked up on
me; I honestly never realized.... Yes, Conn. This is a cause worth
lying for." He looked at his watch. "We ought to be starting for
Senta's, but let's take a few minutes and talk this over. How are you
going to get it started?"

"Well, convince them that I can find Merlin and that they can't find
it without me. I think I've done that already. Then convince them that
we'll have to have a ship to get to Koshchei, and--"

"Won't do. That'll take money, and money's something none of this gang
has."

"You heard me talk about the stuff I found out on Terra? Father, you
have no idea what all there is. You remember the old Force Command
Headquarters, the one the Planetary Government took over? I know where
there's a duplicate of that, completely underground. It has everything
the other one had, and a lot more, because it'll be cram-full of
supplies to be used in case of a general blitz that would knock out
everything on the planet. And a chain of hospitals. And a spaceport,
over on Barathrum, that was built inside the crater of an extinct
volcano. There won't be any hyperships there of course, but there'll
be equipment and material. We might be able to build a ship there. And
supply depots, all over the planet; none of them has ever been opened
since the War. Don't worry about financing; we have that."

His father, he could see, appreciated what he had brought home from
Terra. He was nodding, with quick head jerks, at each item.

"That'll do it, all right. Now, listen; what we want to do is get a
company organized, a regular limited-liability company, with a
charter. We'll contribute the information you brought back from Terra,
and we'll get the rest of this gang to put all the money we can twist
out of them into it, so we'll be sure they won't say, 'Aw, Nifflheim
with it!' and walk out on us as soon as the going gets a little
tough." Rodney Maxwell got to his feet, hitching his gun-belt. "I'll
pass the word to Kurt to get a meeting set up for tomorrow afternoon."

"What'll we call this company? Merlin Rediscovery, Ltd?"

"No! We keep Merlin out of it. As far as the public is supposed to
know, this is just a war-material prospecting company. I'll impress on
them that Merlin is to be kept a secret. That way, we'll have to
engage in regular prospecting and salvage work as a front. I'll see to
it that the front is also the main objective." He nodded down the
Mall, toward the sunset, which was blazing even higher and redder.
"Well, let's go. You don't want to be late for your own welcome-home
party."

They walked slowly, still talking, until they came to the end of the
Mall. The escalators to the level below weren't working. Now that he
thought of it, they hadn't been when he had gone away, six years ago,
but he could remember riding up and down on them as a small child. For
a moment they stood in the sunset light, looking down on the lower
terrace as they finished their cigars.

Senta's was mostly outdoors, the tables under the open sky. The people
gathered below were looking at the sunset, too; Litchfielders loved to
watch sunsets, maybe because a sunset was one of the few things
economic conditions couldn't affect. There was Kurt Fawzi, the center
of a group to whom he was declaiming earnestly; there was his mother,
and Flora, and Flora's fiance, who was the uncomfortable lone man in
an excited feminine flock. And there was Senta herself, short and
dumpy, in one of her preposterous red and purple dresses, bubbling
happily one moment and screaming invective at some laggard waiter the
next.

They threw away their cigars and started down the long, motionless
escalator. Conn Maxwell, Hero of the Hour, marching to Destiny. He
seemed to hear trumpets sounding before him.

And an occasional muted Bronx cheer.




IV


The alarm chimed softly beside his bed; he reached out and silenced
it, and lay looking at the early sunlight in the windows, and found
that he was wishing himself back in his dorm room at the University.
No, back in this room, ten years ago, before any of this had started.
For a while, he imagined himself thirteen years old and knowing
everything he knew now, and he began mapping a campaign to establish
himself as Litchfield's Juvenile Delinquent Number One, to the end
that Kurt Fawzi and Dolf Kellton and the rest of them would never
dream of sending him to school on Terra to find out where Merlin was.

But he couldn't even go back to yesterday afternoon in Kurt Fawzi's
office and tell them the truth. All he could do was go ahead. It had
seemed so easy, when he and his father had been talking on the Mall;
just get a ship built, and get out to Koshchei, and open some of the
shipyards and engine works there, and build a hypership. Sure;
easy--once he got started.

He climbed out of bed, knuckled the sleep-sand out of his eyes, threw
his robe around him, and started across the room to the bath cubicle.

They had decided to have breakfast together his first morning home.
The party had broken up late, and then there had been the excitement
of opening the presents he had brought back from Terra. Nobody had had
a chance to talk about Merlin, or about what he was going to do, now
that he was home. That, and his career of mendacity, would start at
breakfast. He wanted to let his father get to the table first, to run
interference for him; he took his time with his toilet and dressed
carefully and slowly. Finally, he zipped up the short waist-length
jacket and went out.

His father and mother and Flora were at the table, and the
serving-robot was floating around a few inches off the floor, steam
trailing from its coffee urn and its tray lid up to offer food. He
greeted everybody and sat down at his place, and the robot came around
to him. His mother had selected all the things he'd been most fond of
six years ago: shovel-snout bacon, hotcakes, starberry jam, things he
hadn't tasted since he had gone away. He filled his plate and poured a
cup of coffee.

"You don't want to bother coming out to the dig with me this morning,
do you?" his father was saying. "I'll be back here for lunch, and
we'll go to the meeting in the afternoon."

"Meeting?" Flora asked. "What meeting?"

"Oh, we didn't have time to tell you," Rodney Maxwell said. "You know,
Conn brought back a lot of information on locations of supply depots
and things like that. An amazing list of things that haven't been
discovered yet. It's going to be too much for us to handle alone;
we're organizing a company to do it. We'll need a lot of labor, for
one thing; jobs for some of these Tramptowners."

"That's going to be something awfully big," his mother said dubiously.
"You never did anything like that before."

"I never had the kind of a partner I have now. It's Maxwell & Son,
from now on."

"Who's going to be in this company?" Flora wanted to know.

"Oh, everybody around town; Kurt and the Judge and Klem, and Lester
Dawes. All that crowd."

"The Fawzis' Office Gang," Flora said disparagingly. "I suppose
they'll want Conn to take them right to where Merlin is, the first
thing."

"Well, not the first thing," Conn said. "Merlin was one thing I
couldn't find out anything about on Terra."

"I'll bet you couldn't!"

"The people at Armed Forces Records would let me look at everything
else, and make microcopies and all, but not one word about computers.
Forty years, and they still have the security lid welded shut on
that."

Flora looked at him in shocked surprise. "You don't mean to tell me
you believe in that thing?"

"Sure. How do you think they fought a war around a perimeter of close
to a thousand light-years? They couldn't do all that out of their
heads. They'd have to have computers, and the one they'd use to
correlate everything and work out grand-strategy plans would have to
be a dilly. Why, I'd give anything just to look at the operating
panels for that thing."

"But that's just a silly story; there never was anything like Merlin.
No wonder you couldn't find out about it. You were looking for
something that doesn't exist, just like all these old cranks that sit
around drinking brandy and mooning about what Merlin's going to do
for them, and never doing anything for themselves."

"Oh, they're going to do something, now, Flora," his father told her.
"When we get this company organized--"

"You'll dig up a lot of stuff you won't be able to sell, like that
stuff you've been bringing in from Tenth Army, and then you'll go
looping off chasing Merlin, like the rest of them. Well, maybe that'll
be a little better than just sitting in Kurt Fawzi's office talking
about it, but not much."

It kept on like that. Conn and his father tried several times to
change the subject; each time Flora ignored the effort and returned to
her diatribe. Finally, she put her plate and cup on the robot's tray
and got to her feet.

"I have to go," she said. "Maybe I can do something to keep some of
these children from growing up to be Merlin-worshipers like their
parents."

She flung out of the room angrily. Mrs. Maxwell looked after her in
distress.

"And I thought it was going to be so nice, having breakfast together
again," she lamented.

Somehow the breakfast wasn't quite as good as he'd thought it was at
first. He wondered how many more breakfasts like that he was going to
have to sit through. He and his father finished quickly and got up,
while his mother started the robot to clearing the table.

"Conn," she said, after his father had gone out, "you shouldn't have
gotten Flora started like that."

"I didn't get Flora started; she's equipped with a self-starter. If
she doesn't believe in Merlin, that's her business. A lot of these
people do, and I'm going to help them hunt for it. That's why they all
chipped in to send me to school on Terra; remember?"

"Yes, I know." Her voice was heavy with distress. "Conn, do you really
believe there is a ... that thing?" she asked.

"Why, of course." He was mildly surprised at how sincerely and
straightforwardly he said it. "I don't know where it is, but it's
somewhere on Poictesme, or in the Alpha System."

"Well, do you think it would be a good thing to find it?"

That surprised him. Everybody knew it would be, and his mother didn't
share his father's attitude about things everybody knew. She hadn't
any business questioning a fundamental postulate like that.

"It frightens me," she continued. "I don't even like to think about
it. A soulless intelligence; it seems evil to me."

"Well, of course it's soulless. It's a machine, isn't it? An aircar's
soulless, but you're not afraid to ride in one."

"But this is different. A machine that can think. Conn, people weren't
meant to make machines like that, wiser than they are."

"Now wait a minute, Mother. You're talking to a computerman now."
Professional authority was something his mother oughtn't to question.
"A computer like Merlin isn't intelligent, or wise, or anything of the
sort. It doesn't think; the people who make computers and use them do
the thinking. A computer's a tool, like a screwdriver; it has to have
a man to use it."

"Well, but...."

"And please, don't talk about what people are _meant_ to do. People
aren't _meant_ to do things; they _mean_ to do things, and nine times
out of ten, they end by doing them. It may take a hundred thousand
years from a Stone Age savage in a cave to the captain of a hyperspace
ship, but sooner or later they get there."

His mother was silent. The soulless machine that had been clearing the
table floated out of the room, the dishwasher in its rectangular belly
gurgling. Maybe what he had told her was logical, but women aren't
impressed by logic. She knew better--for the good old feminine reason,
_Because_.

"Wade Lucas wanted me to drop in on him for a checkup," he mentioned.
"That's rubbish; I had one for my landing pratique on the ship. He
just wants to size up his future brother-in-law."

"Well, you ought to go see him."

"How did Flora come to meet him, anyhow?"

"Well, you know, he came from Baldur. He was in Storisende, looking
for an opening to start a practice, and he heard about some medical
equipment your father had found somewhere and came out to see if he
could buy it. Your father and Judge Ledue and Mr. Fawzi talked him
into opening his office here. Then he and Flora got acquainted...."
She asked, anxiously: "What did you think of him, Conn?"

"Seems like a regular guy. I think I'll like him." A husband like Wade
Lucas might be a good thing for Flora. "I'll drop in on him, sometime
this morning."

His mother went toward the rear of the house--more soulless machines,
like the housecleaning-robot, and the laundry-robot, to look after. He
went into his father's office and found the cigar humidor, just where
it had been when he'd stolen cigars out of it six years ago and
thought his father never suspected what he was doing.

Now, why didn't they export this tobacco? It was better than anything
they grew on Terra; well, at least it was different, just as Poictesme
brandy was different from Terran bourbon or Baldur honey-rum. That was
the sort of thing that could be sold in interstellar trade anytime and
anywhere; the luxury goods that were unique. Staple foodstuffs,
utility textiles, metal products, could be produced anywhere, and
sooner or later they were. That was the reason for the original,
pre-War depression: the customers were all producing for themselves.
He'd talk that over with his father. He wished he'd had time to take
some economics at the University.

He found the file his father kept up-to-date on salvage sites found
and registered with the Claims Office in Storisende. Some of the
locations he had brought back data for had been discovered, but, to
his relief, not the underground duplicate Force Command Headquarters,
and not the spaceport on the island continent of Barathrum, to the
east. That was all right.

He went to the house-defense arms closet and found a 10-mm Navy
pistol, and a belt and spare clips. Making sure that the pistol and
magazines were loaded, he buckled it on. He debated getting a vehicle
out of the hangar on the landing stage, decided against it, and
started downtown on foot.

One of the first people he met was Len Yeniguchi, the tailor. He would
be at the meeting that afternoon. He managed, while talking, to
comment on the cut of Conn's suit, and finger the material.

"Ah, nice," he complimented. "Made on Terra? We don't see cloth like
that here very often."

He meant it wasn't Armed Forces salvage.

"Father ought to be around to see you with a bolt of material, to have
a suit made," he said. "For Ghu's sake, either talk him into having a
short jacket like this, or get him to buy himself a shoulder holster.
He's ruined every coat he ever owned, carrying a gun on his hip."

A little farther on, he came to a combat car grounded in the middle of
the street. It was green, with black trimmings, and lettered in black,
GORDON VALLEY HOME GUARD. Tom Brangwyn was standing beside
it, talking to a young man in a green uniform.

"Hello, Conn." The town marshal looked at his hip and grinned. "See
you got all your clothes on this morning. You were just plain
indecent, yesterday.... You know Fred Karski, don't you?"

Yes, now that Tom mentioned it, he did. He and Fred had gone to school
together at the Litchfield Academy. But the six years since they'd
seen each other last had made a lot of difference in both of them. He
was beginning to think that the only strangers in Litchfield were his
own contemporaries. They shook hands, and Conn looked at the combat
car and Fred Karski's uniform.

"What's going on?" he asked. "The System States Alliance to business
again?"

Karski laughed. "Oh, that's the Colonel's idea. Green and black were
his colors in the War, and he's in command of the regiment."

"Regiment? You need a whole regiment?" Conn asked.

"Well, it's two companies, each about the size of a regular army
platoon, but we have to call it a regiment so he can keep his old
Rebel Army rank."

"We could use a regiment, Conn," Tom Brangwyn said seriously. "You
have no idea how bad things have gotten. Over on the east coast, the
outlaws are looting whole towns. About four months ago, they sacked
Waterville; burned the whole town and killed close to a hundred
people. That was Blackie Perales' gang."

"Who is this Blackie Perales? I heard the name mentioned in connection
with the _Harriet Barne_."

"Blackie Perales is anybody the Planetary Government can't catch,
which means practically any outlaw," Fred Karski said.

"No, Fred; there is a Blackie Perales," Tom Brangwyn said. "He used to
be a planter, down in the south. The banks foreclosed on him when he
couldn't pay his notes, and he turned outlaw. That's the way it's
going, all around. Every time a planter loses his plantation or a
farmer loses his farm, or a mechanic loses his job, he turns outlaw.
Take Tramptown, here. We used to plant nothing but melons. Then, when
the sale for wine and brandy dropped, the melon-planters began cutting
their melon crops and raising produce, instead of buying it from up
north, and turning land into pasture for cattle. The people we used to
buy foodstuffs from couldn't sell all they raised, and that threw a
lot of farmhands out of work. So they got the idea there was work
here, and they came flocking in, and when they couldn't get jobs, they
just stayed in Tramptown, stealing anything they could. We don't even
try to police Tramptown any more; we just see to it they don't come up
here."

"Well, where do these outlaws and pirates who are looting whole towns
come from?"

"Down in the Badlands, mostly. None of them have been bothering us,
since we organized the Home Guard. They tried to, a couple of times,
at first. There may have been a few survivors; they spread it around
that Gordon Valley wasn't any outlaws' health resort."

"Why don't you join us, Conn?" Fred Karski asked. "All our old gang
belong."

"I'd like to, but I'm afraid I'm going to be kind of busy."

Brangwyn nodded. "Yes. You will be, at that," he agreed.

"So I hear," Fred Karski said. "Do you really know where it is,
Conn?"

"Well, no." He went into the routine about Merlin being still
classified triple-top secret. "But we'll find it. It may take time,
but we will."

They talked for a while. He asked more questions about the Home Guard.
His father, it seemed, had donated all the equipment. They had a
hundred and seventy men on the active list, but they had a reserve of
over eight hundred, and combat vehicles and weapons on all the
plantations and in all the towns along the river. The reserve had only
been turned out twice; both times, outlaw attacks had been stopped
dead--literally. The Home Guard, it appeared, was not given to making
arrests or taking prisoners. Finally, he parted from them, strolling
on along the row of stores and business places, many vacant, under the
south edge of the Mall, until he saw a fluorolite sign, WADE
LUCAS, M. D. He entered.

Lucas wasn't busy. They went into his consultation office, and Conn
took off his gun-belt and hung it up; Lucas offered cigarettes, and
they lighted and sat down.

"I see you've started carrying one," he said, nodding to the pistol
Conn had laid aside.

"Civic obligation. I'm going to be too busy for Home Guard duty, but
if I can protect myself, it'll save somebody else the job of
protecting me."

"Maybe if there weren't so many guns around, there wouldn't be so much
trouble."

He felt his good opinion of Wade Lucas start to slip. The Liberals on
Terra had been full of that kind of talk, which was why only four out
of ten of last year's graduating class at Armed Forces Academy had
been able to get active commissions. The last war had been a disaster,
so don't prepare for another one; when it comes, let it be a worse
disaster.

"Guns don't make trouble; people make trouble. If the troublemakers
are armed, you have to be armed too. When did you last see an Air
Patrol boat around here, or even a Constabulary trooper? All we have
here is the Home Guard and Tom Brangwyn and three deputies, and his
pay and theirs is always six months in arrears."

Lucas nodded. "A bankrupt government, an unemployment rate that rises
every year, currency that buys less every month. And do-it-yourself
justice." The doctor blew a smoke ring and watched it float toward the
ventilator-intake. "You said you're going to be busy. This company
your father's talking about organizing?"

"That's right. You're going to be at the meeting at the Academy this
afternoon, aren't you?"

"Yes. Just what are you going to do, after you get it organized?"

"Well, I brought back information on a great deal of undiscovered
equipment and stores that the Third Force left behind...." He talked
on for some time, keeping to safe generalities. "It's too big for my
father and me to handle alone, even if we didn't feel morally
obligated to take in the people who contributed toward sending me to
school on Terra. You ought to be interested in it. I know of six fully
supplied hospitals, intended to take care of the casualties in case of
a System States space-attack. You can imagine, better than I can, what
would be in them."

"Yes. Medical supplies of all sorts are getting hard to find. But look
here; you're not going to let these people waste time looking for this
alleged computer, this thing they call Merlin, are you?"

"We're looking for any valuable war material. I don't know the
location of Merlin, but--"

"I'll bet you don't!" Lucas said vehemently. That was the same thing
Flora had said.

"--but Merlin is undoubtedly the most valuable item of abandoned TF
equipment on this planet. In the long run, I'd say, more valuable than
everything else together. We certainly aren't going to ignore it."

"Good heavens, Conn! You aren't like these people here; you were
educated at the University of Montevideo."

"So I was. I studied computer theory and practice. I have some doubts
about Merlin being able to do some of the things these laymen like
Kellton and Fawzi and Judge Ledue think it could. Those sorts of
misconceptions and exaggerations have to be allowed for. But I have no
doubt whatever that the master computer with which they did their
strategic planning is probably the greatest mechanism of its sort ever
built, and I have no doubt whatever that it still exists somewhere in
the Alpha System."

He almost convinced himself of it. He did not, however, convince Wade
Lucas, who was now regarding him with narrow-eyed suspicion.

"You mean you categorically state that that computer actually exists?"

"That, I think, was the general idea. Yes. I certainly do believe that
Merlin exists."

Maybe he was telling the truth. Merlin existed in the beliefs and
hopes of people like Dolf Kellton and Klem Zareff and Judge Ledue and
Kurt Fawzi. Merlin was a god to them. Well, take Ghu, the Thoran
Grandfather-God. Ghu was as preposterous, theologically, as Merlin was
technologically; Ghu, except to Thorans, was a Federation-wide joke.
But he'd known a couple of Thorans at the University, funny little
fellows, with faces like terriers, their bodies covered with matted
black hair. They believed in Ghu the way he believed in the Second Law
of Thermodynamics. Ghu was with them every moment of their lives. Take
away their belief in Ghu, and they would have been lost and wretched.

As lost and wretched as Kurt Fawzi or Judge Ledue, if they lost their
belief in Merlin. He started to say something like that, and then
thought better of it.

Yes, Virginia, there _is_ a Santa Claus.




V


The meeting was at the Academy; when Conn and his father arrived, they
found the central hall under the topside landing stage crowded. Kurt
Fawzi and Professor Kellton had constituted themselves a reception
committee. Franz Veltrin was in evidence with his audiovisual
recorder, and Colonel Zareff was leaning on his silver-headed sword
cane. Tom Brangwyn, in an unaccustomed best-suit. Wade Lucas, among a
group of merchants, arguing heatedly. Lorenzo Menardes, the
distiller, and Lester Dawes, the banker, and Morgan Gatworth, the
lawyer, talking to Judge Ledue. About four times as many as had been
in Fawzi's office the afternoon before.

Finally, everybody was shepherded into a faculty conference room;
there was a long table, and a shorter one T-wise at one end. Fawzi and
Kellton conducted them to this. Both of them were trying to preside,
Kellton because it was his Academy, and Fawzi ex officio as mayor and
professional leading citizen, and because he had come to regard Merlin
as his own private project. After everybody else was seated, the two
rival chairmen-presumptive remained on their feet. Fawzi was saying,
"Let's come to order; we must conduct this meeting regularly," and
Kellton was saying, "Gentlemen, please; let me have your attention."

If either of them took the chair, the other would resent it. Conn got
to his feet again.

"Somebody will have to preside," he said, loudly enough to cut through
the babble at the long table. "Would you take the chair, Judge Ledue?"

That stopped it. Neither of them wanted to contest the honor with the
president-judge of the Gordon Valley court.

"Excellent suggestion, Conn. Judge, will you preside?" Professor
Kellton, who had seen himself losing out to Fawzi, asked. Fawzi threw
one quick look around, estimated the situation, and got with it. "Of
course, Judge. You're the logical chairman. Here, will you sit here?"

Judge Ledue took the chair, looked around for something to use as a
gavel, and rapped sharply with a paperweight.

"Young Mr. Conn Maxwell, who has just returned from Terra, needs no
introduction to any of you," he began. Then, having established that,
he took the next ten minutes to introduce Conn. When people began
fidgeting, he wound up with: "Now, only about a dozen of us were at
the informal meeting in Mr. Fawzi's office, yesterday. Conn, would you
please repeat what you told us? Elaborate as you see fit."

Conn rose. He talked briefly about his studies on Terra to qualify
himself as an expert. Then he began describing the wealth of abandoned
and still undiscovered Federation war material and the many
installations of which he had learned, careful to avoid giving clues
to exact locations. The spaceport; the underground duplicate Force
Command Headquarters; the vast underground arsenals and shops and
supply depots. Everybody was awed, even his father; he hadn't had time
to tell him more than a fraction of it.

Finally, somebody from the long table interrupted:

"Well, Conn; how about Merlin? That's what we're interested in."

Wade Lucas snorted indignantly.

"He's telling you about real things, things worth millions of sols,
and you want him to talk about that idiotic fantasy!"

There was an angry outcry. Nobody actually shouted "_To the stake with
the blasphemer!_" but that was the general idea. Judge Ledue was
rapping loudly for order.

"I don't know the exact location of Merlin." Conn strove to make
himself heard. "The whole subject's classified top secret. But I am
certain that Merlin exists, if not on Poictesme then somewhere in the
Alpha System, and I am equally certain that we can find it."

Cheers. He waited for the hubbub to subside. Lucas was trying to yell
above it.

"You admit you couldn't learn anything about this so-called Merlin,
but you're still certain it exists?"

"Why are you certain it doesn't?"

"Why, the whole thing's absurdly fantastic!"

"Maybe it is, to a layman like you. I studied computers, and it isn't
to me."

"Well, take all these elaborate preparations against space attack you
were telling us about. I think Colonel Zareff, here, who served in the
Alliance Army, will bear me out that such an attack was plainly
impossible."

Zareff started to agree, then realized that he was aiding and
comforting the enemy. "Intelligence lag," he said. "What do you
expect, with General Headquarters thirty parsecs from the fighting?"

"Yes. A computer can only process the data that's been taped into it,"
Conn said. That was a point he wanted to ram home, as forcibly and as
often as possible. "I suppose Merlin classified an Alliance attack on
Poictesme as a low-order probability, but war is the province of
chance; Clausewitz said that a thousand years ago. Foxx Travis wasn't
the sort of commander to let himself get caught, even by a very
low-order probability."

"Well how do you explain the absence, after forty years, of any
mention, in any history of the War, of Merlin? How do you get around
that?"

"I don't have to. How do you get around it?"

"_Huh?_" Lucas was startled.

"Yes. Stories about Merlin were all over Poictesme, all through the
Third Force, even to the enemy. Say the stories were unfounded; say
Merlin never existed. Yet the belief in Merlin was an important
historical fact, and no history of the War gives it so much as a
footnote." He paused for effect, then continued: "That can mean only
one thing. Systematic suppression, backed by the whole force of the
Terran Federation. A gigantic conspiracy of silence!"

Brother! If they swallow that, I have it made; they'll swallow
anything!

They did, all but Lucas. He banged his fist on the table.

"Now I've heard everything!" he shouted in disgust.

"Not quite everything, Doctor," Morgan Gatworth said. "You will hear,
one of these days, that we have found Merlin."

"Yes, that'll be the day!" Lucas sprang to his feet, his chair
toppling behind him. He shoved it aside with his foot. "I'm not going
to argue with you. Conn Maxwell gave you a thousand-year-old
quotation; I'll give you another, from Thomas Paine: 'To argue with
those who have renounced the use and authority of reason is as futile
as to administer medicine to the dead.' I'll add this. Conn Maxwell
knows better than this balderdash he's been spouting to you. I don't
know what his racket is, and I'm not staying to find out. You will,
though--to your regret."

He turned and strode from the room. There was a moment's silence,
after the door slammed behind him. Too bad, Conn thought. He would
have made a good friend. Now he was going to make a very nasty enemy.

"Well, let's get to business," his father said. "We don't have to
argue about the existence of Merlin; we know that. Let's discuss the
question of finding it."

"I still think it's somewhere off-planet," Lorenzo Menardes said. "The
moons of Pantagruel...."

Evidently he'd read something, or seen an old film, about the moons of
Pantagruel.

"No, that's too far; they'd keep it where they could use it."

"The old GHQ," Lester Dawes suggested. "Suppose it's down under that,
like the place Rodney found under Tenth Army."

"I hope not," Gathworth said. "The Planetary Government took that
over."

"Well, wherever it is, finding it is going to be expensive," Rodney
Maxwell said. "Now, to finance the search, I propose we use this
information my son brought back from Terra. Doctor Lucas was right
about one thing; that's worth millions of sols. Well, I propose, also,
that we set up a company and get it chartered; a prospecting company,
to operate under the Abandoned Property Act of 867. My son and I will
contribute this information as our share in the capitalization of the
company. The work of opening these Federation installations can go on
concurrently with the search for Merlin, and the profits can finance
it."

Silence for a moment, then a bedlam of cheering.

"Well, let's get organized," Gatworth said. "What will we call this
company?"

A number of voices shouted suggestions. Rodney Maxwell managed to get
recognition and partial silence.

"It is of the first importance," he said, "that we keep our real
objective--Merlin--as close a secret as possible. The Planetary
Government would like to get hold of it--and I leave you to ask
yourselves how far Jake Vyckhoven and his cronies are to be trusted
with anything like that--and I have no doubt the Federation might try
to take it away from us."

"Couldn't do it, Rodney," Judge Ledue objected. "Everything the
Federation abandoned in the Trisystem is public domain now. We have a
Federation Supreme Court ruling--"

"What's legality to the Federation?" Klem Zareff demanded. "They
fought a criminally illegal war of aggression against my people."

Down the table, somebody started singing "Rally Round the Banner, the
Banner Black and Green."

"Well, I think it's a good idea to keep quiet about it, myself," Kurt
Fawzi said.

"All right," Rodney Maxwell said. "Then we don't want this company to
sound like anything but another salvage company. I suggest we call it
Litchfield Exploration & Salvage."

"Good name, Rodney," Dawes approved. "That a motion? I second it."

Unanimously carried. They had a name, now, anyhow. Everybody began
suggesting other topics for consideration--capitalization, application
for charter, election of officers, stock issues. Conn paid less and
less attention. Industrial finance and organization wasn't his
subject, either. His father was plunging happily into it as though he
had been promoting companies all his life. Conn sat and doodled with
his six-color pen, mostly spherical hyperspace ships.

"We can't get all this cleared up now," Lester Dawes was protesting.
"Your Honor, I mean, Mr. Chairman; I suggest that committees be
appointed...."

More hassling; everybody wanted to be on all the committees. Finally,
they appointed enough committees to include everybody.

"Well, that seems to be cleared up," Judge Ledue said, "I suggest a
meeting day after tomorrow evening; the committees should have
everything set up, and we should be able to organize ourselves and
elect permanent officers. Is there anything else to discuss, or do I
hear a motion to adjourn?"

Somebody thought they ought to have some idea of what the first
operation would be.

"You heard me mention a spaceport," Conn said. "I can tell you, now,
that it's over on Barathrum, inside the crater of an extinct volcano.
I think we ought to have a look at that, first of all."

"I know you seemed to think yesterday that Merlin is off-planet,"
Fawzi said, "I'm inclined to disagree, Conn. I think it's right here
on Poictesme."

"We ought to nail that spaceport down first," Conn argued.

"Conn, you mentioned an underground duplicate of Travis's general
headquarters," Zareff said. "They thought we'd possibly send a fleet
here to blitz Poictesme, or they wouldn't have built that. And this
underground headquarters would be the safest place on the planet;
they'd make sure of that. Staff brass don't like to get caught out in
the rain, not when it's raining hellburners and planetbusters. Merlin
would be too big to take there along with them, so they'd put it there
in the first place."

That made sense. If he'd been Foxx Travis, and if there had been a
Merlin, that was exactly where he'd have put it himself. But there was
no Merlin, and he wanted a ship. He argued mulishly for a little, then
saw that it was hopeless and gave in.

"I want to find Merlin as much as any of you," he said. "More. Merlin
was the only thing I was trained for. We'll look there first."

Somebody asked where, approximately, this underground Force Command
headquarters was.

"Why, it's in the Badlands, over between the Blaubergs and the east
coast."

"Great Ghu! We'll need an army to go in there!" Tom Brangwyn said.
"That's where all these outlaws have been coming from, Blackie Perales
and all."

"Then we'll get an army together," Klem Zareff said happily. "Might
make a little of that reward money that's been offered."

"We'll need more than that. Well need excavation equipment, and labor.
Lots of labor," Conn said. "It's a couple of hundred feet below the
surface; from the plans, I'd say they just dug a big pit, built the
headquarters in it, and filled it in. There are two entrances, a
vertical shaft and a horizontal tunnel."

"When they pulled out, they probably filled the shaft and vitrified
the rock at the outer ends," his father added. "That was what they did
at Tenth Army."

Another idea hit him. "Mr. Mayor, do you think you could set up some
kind of a public-works program here in Litchfield? We can't start this
till after the wine-pressing's over, and we'll need a lot of labor, as
I pointed out. Now, it's important that we keep all our projects a
secret until we can get our claims filed. If we start this municipal
fix-up-and-clean-up program, we can give work to a lot of these
drifters who haven't been able to get jobs on the plantations, get
them organized into gangs, and keep them together till we're ready for
the Force Command job."

Lorenzo Menardes supported the idea. "And while they were boondoggling
around in Litchfield, we could pick out the best workers, get rid of
the incompetents, and train a few supervisors. That's going to be one
of our worst headaches; getting capable supervisors."

"You telling me?" Rodney Maxwell asked. "That was what I was wondering
about: where we'd get gang-bosses. And another thing; this municipal
housecleaning would mask our real preparations."

"Well, we need something like that," Fawzi said. "We've needed it for
a long time. I guess it took Conn, coming home from Terra, to see how
badly we've let the town get run down. Franz, suppose you and Tom
Brangwyn and Lorenzo form a committee on that. Look around, see what
needs fixing up worst, and set up a project. Who's city engineer now?"

"Abe O'Leary; he died six years ago," Dawes said. "You never appointed
his successor."

"Well, I guess I never got around to that," the mayor of Litchfield
admitted.

When the meeting finally adjourned, they went up and got in the car;
his father lifted it straight up to thirty thousand feet and started
circling. An aircar was one place where they could talk safely.

"Conn, I was kind of worried, down there. You were being a little too
positive. You know, you're only twenty-three. As long as you agree
with those people, you're a brilliant young man; you start getting
ideas of your own, and you're just a half-baked kid. You let the older
and wiser heads run things. You can't begin to hope to foul things up
the way they can. Look at all the experience they've had."

"But we've got to have a ship. Everything depends on that."

"I know it does. We'll get a ship. Let Kurt Fawzi and Klem Zareff and
the rest of them have this duplicate Force Command thing first,
though. Keep them happy. As soon as we have that opened, you can take
a gang and run over to Barathrum and grab your spaceport. Wait till
they find out that Merlin isn't at Force Command Duplicate. Then you
can convince them it's really on Koshchei."




VI


The car Rodney Maxwell got out of the hangar the next morning wasn't
the one he and Conn had gone to the meeting in; it was the one he had
flown in from Tenth Army HQ at noon of the previous day. An Army
reconnaissance job, slim and needlelike, completely enclosed, looking
more like a missile than a vehicle, and armored in dazzling,
iridescent collapsium. There was something to living on Poictesme, at
that; only a millionaire on Terra could have owned a car like that.

"Nice," Conn said. "Where did you dig it?"

"Where we're going, Tenth Army."

"I'll bet she'll do Mach Three."

"Better than that. I've never had her above 2.5, but the airspeed
gauge is marked up to four. And she has everything: all kinds of
detection instruments, cameras, audiovisual pickups, armament. And
the armor; you can take her through any kind of radiation."

The armor was only a couple of micromicrons thick, but it would stop
anything. It was collapsed matter, the electron shells of the atoms
collapsed upon the nuclei, the atoms in actual contact. That plating
made eighth-inch sheet steel as heavy as twelve-inch armor plate, and
in texture and shielding properties, lead was like sponge by
comparison.

They climbed in, and Rodney Maxwell snapped on the screens that served
as windows. Conn leaned back and looked at the underside view in a
screen on the roof of the car, as his father started the lift-engine.

"Still think it's worth the price, son?" his father asked.

The price had begun to rise; even so, he was afraid that what they had
paid so far was only the down payment. Dinner last evening. Flora, who
had evidently been talking to Wade Lucas, shouting accusations at
them; his mother fleeing from the table in tears. As the car rose, he
reached out and turned on and adjusted the telescreen for the
under-view.

"Keep your eye on that, Father," he said. "That's what we're paying to
get rid of."

A distillery, bigger than the Menardes plant, long closed and now half
roofless and crumbling. Rows of warehouses, empty after the War until
taken over by homeless vagrants. Jerry-built shanties with rattletrap
aircars grounded around them. Tramptown, a festering sore on the south
side of Litchfield.

"If we put this over," he continued, "all those tramps will have
steady work and good homes. We can have a park there, with fountains
that'll work. Maybe even Flora and Mother will think we've done
something worth doing."

"It'll be kind of hard to take in the meantime, though, but if you can
take it, I can." Rodney Maxwell turned off the underside teleview
screen and put on the forward one. "See that little pink spot over
there? Sunrise on the east side of Snagtooth; Tenth Army's just behind
us. Now, let's see if this airspeed gauge is telling the truth or just
bragging."

Sudden acceleration pushed them back in their seats. The calibrations
on the gauge rose swiftly; the pink-lighted peak grew swiftly in the
teleview screen. The gauge hadn't been bragging, it had been
understating; the car had more speed than the instrument could
register. Two and a half minutes from Litchfield, they were
decelerating and swinging slowly around Snagtooth, looking down on a
tilted plateau that ended on the western side in a sheer drop of
almost a thousand feet.

There were ruinous buildings on it: barracks and storehouses and
offices, an airship dock and an air-traffic control tower from which
all the glass had long ago vanished, a great steel telecast tower that
had fallen, crushing a couple of buildings. Young trees had already
grown among the wreckage.

"Look over there, on the slope below it; there's one entrance to the
shelters." There was a clearing among the evergreens, half a mile from
the buildings, and raw earth, and a couple of big scows grounded near.
"They bulldozed rock and earth over the end of the tunnel. Then,
there's another one down on that bench, a couple of hundred feet below
the edge of the plateau. They blasted rock down over that. The main
entrance is a vertical shaft under that pre-stressed concrete dome.
That was chapel, auditorium, or something. They just covered it with
sheet metal and poured a foot of concrete on top."

They floated down above the broken roofs and crumbling walls, and
grounded in the area between the main administration building and the
offices, back of the ship docks. Once, he supposed, it had been a
lawn. Then it had been a jungle. Now it was a scuffed, littered,
bare-trodden work-yard. Men were straggling out of the administration
building, lighting pipes and cigarettes; they all wore new but
work-soiled infantry battle dress. All of them waved and shouted
greetings; one, about Conn's own age, approached. As he got out, Conn
saw the resemblance to Lester Dawes, the banker, before he recognized
Anse Dawes, who had been one of his closest friends six years ago.
They shook hands and pounded each other on the back.

"Hey, you're looking great, Conn!" They all told him that; he'd begin
to believe it pretty soon. "Sorry I couldn't make the party, but
somebody had to sit on the lid here, and Jerry Rivas and I cut cards
for it and Jerry won."

"You didn't tell me Anse was with you," he reproached his father.
Rodney Maxwell said he'd been saving that for a surprise.

When Conn asked Anse what was the matter with the bank, he said: "For
the birds; I'd as soon count sheets of toilet paper as this stuff
we're using for money. Sooner. Toilet paper can be used for something,
and this paper money's too stiff. Maybe some of this stuff we're
digging here isn't worth much, but at least it's real."

That was something else the Maxwell Plan would have to take care of.
Gresham's Law was running hog-wild on Poictesme. A Planetary
Government sol was worth about ten centisols, Federation, and aside
from deposit boxes, woolen socks under the mattress, and tin cans
buried in the corner of the cellar, Federation currency was
nonexistent.

"Had breakfast yet?" Rodney Maxwell asked.

"Oh, hours ago. I was out and shot another spikenose; it's hanging up
back of the kitchen, waiting for the cook to skin it and cut it up."
He grinned at Conn. "You don't get this kind of hunting in a bank,
either."

"Jerry still inside? I want to see him. Suppose you take Conn around
and show him the sights. And don't worry about him bumping you out of
a job. Worry about the six or eight extra jobs you'll have to do
besides your own, from now on."

Conn and Anse crossed the yard and entered one of the office
buildings, through a big breach in the wall. Anse said: "I did that
myself; 90-mm tank gun. When we want a wall out of the way, we get it
out of the way." Inside were a lot of lifters and skids and power
shovels and things; laborers were assembling for work assignments.
Most of them had been with his father six years ago and he knew them.
They hadn't done any growing up in the meantime. They climbed into an
airjeep and floated out over the edge of the plateau, letting down
past the sheer cliff to where the lower lateral shaft had been opened.
A great deal of rock had been shoveled and bulldozed away to expose
it; it was twenty feet high and forty wide. Anse simply steered the
jeep inside and up the tunnel.

There were occasional lights on at the ceiling. Anse said they were
all powered from their own nuclear-electric conversion units. "We
don't have the central power on here; there's a big mass-energy
converter, but we're tearing it down to ship out."

That was something they could get a good price for. Maybe even
one-tenth of what it was worth. At least they wouldn't have to sell it
by the ton.

The tunnel ended in an enormous room a couple of hundred feet square
and fifty high. There was a wide aisle up the middle; on either side,
contragravity equipment was massed. Tanks with long 90-mm guns. Combat
cars. Small airboats. Rank on rank of air-cavalry single-mounts,
egg-shaped things just big enough for a man to sit in, with quadruple
machine guns in front and flame-jets behind. Ambulances armored
against radiation; decontamination units; mobile workshops; mobile
kitchens. Troop carriers, jeeps, staff cars; power shovels,
manipulators, lifters. All waiting, for forty years, to swarm out as
soon as the bombs that never came stopped falling.

They floated the jeep along hallways beyond, and got down to look into
rooms. Work was already going on in the power plant; a gang under a
slim young man whom Anse introduced as Mohammed Matsui were using
repair-robots to get canisters of live plutonium out of a reactor.
Workshops. Laundries. Storerooms. Kitchens, some stripped and a few
still intact. A hospital. Guardhouse and lockup.

More storerooms on the level above, reached by returning to the
vehicle hangar and lifting to an upper entrance. By this time, gangs
were at work there, too, moving contragravity skids in empty and out
loaded.

"The CO here must have had squirrel blood," Anse said. "I think when
the evacuation orders came through he just gathered up everything
there was topside and crammed it down here, any old way. Honest to
Ghu, this place was packed solid when we found it. Nobody'd believe
it."

"Wait till you see the next one."

"You mean there's another place like this?"

"You can say so. You can say a twenty-megaton thermonuclear is like a
hand grenade, too."

Anse Dawes simply didn't believe that.

When they got back to the Administration Building on top, they found
Rodney Maxwell, Jerry Rivas, the general foremen, and half a dozen
gang foremen, in consultation.

"We're getting a hundred and fifty more men and ten farm scows from
Litchfield," his father said. "Dave McCade's coming out from our yard,
and Tom Brangwyn's sending one of his deputies to help boss them. Well
have to keep an eye on this crowd; they're all Tramptown hoodlums, but
that's the best we can get. We're going to have to get this place
cleaned out in a hurry. We only have about two weeks till the
wine-pressing's over, and then we want to start the next operation.
Conn, did you see all that engineering equipment, down on the bottom
level?"

"Yes. I think we ought to leave a lot of that here--the shovels and
bulldozers and manipulators and so on. We can move it direct to Force
Command. How are we fixed for blasting explosives?"

"Name it and we have it. Cataclysmite, FJ-7, anything you want."

"We'll need a lot of it."

"We're going to have to get a ship. I mean a contragravity ship, a
freighter; first, to move this stuff out of here, and then to move the
stuff out of Force Command. And we want it mounted with heavy
armament, too. We not only want a freighter, we want a fighting ship."

"You think so?"

"I'm sure of it," Rodney Maxwell said. "Where we're going is full of
outlaws; there must be hundreds of them holing up over there. That's
where all the trouble on the east coast comes from. Now, outlaws are
sure-thing players. They want to be alive to spend their loot, and
they won't tackle anything that's too tough for them. A lot of guards
and combat equipment may look like a loss on the books, but the books
won't show how much of a loss you might take if you didn't have them.
I want this operation armed till it'll be too much for all the outlaws
on the planet to tackle."

That made sense. It also made sense out of the billions of sols the
Federation had spent preparing for an invasion that never came. If it
had come and found them unprepared, the loss might have been the war
itself.

The scows and the newly hired workers began arriving a little after
noon. The scows had been borrowed from plantations where the crop
had been gotten in; there were melon leaves and bits of vine in
the bottoms. The workers were a bleary-eyed and unsavory lot;
Conn had a suspicion, which Brangwyn's deputy confirmed, that
they had been collected by mass vagrancy arrests in Tramptown.
As soon as they started arriving, Jerry Rivas hurried down to
the old provost-marshal's headquarters and came back with a lot
of rubber billy-clubs, which he issued to his gang-bosses, regular
and temporary. A few times they had to be used. By evening, however,
the insubordinate and troublesome had been quieted. They would all
steal anything they could put in their pockets, but that was to be
expected. By evening, too, the contents of the underground treasure
trove was moving out in a steady stream, and scows were shuttling to
and from Litchfield.

Rodney Maxwell was going back to town after lunch the next day. Conn
wanted to know if he should go along.

"No, you stay here; help keep things moving. Remember what I told you
about the older and wiser heads? Let me handle them. I've been around
them, heaven pity me, longer than you have. Just give me an
audiovisual of your proxy and I'll vote your stock."

"How much stock do I have, by the way?"

"The same as I have--ten thousand five hundred shares of common, at
twenty centisols a share. But watch where it goes after we open Force
Command."

His father was back, two days later, to report:

"We're organized. Kurt Fawzi's president, of course, and does he love
it. That'll keep him out of mischief. Dolf Kellton's secretary; he has
an office force at the Academy and can conscript students to help.
He's organizing a research team from his seniors and post-grad
students to work in the Planetary Library at Storisende. There are a
lot of old Third Force records there; he may find something useful. Of
course, Lester Dawes is treasurer."

"What are you?"

"Vice-president in charge of operations. That's what I spent all
yesterday log-rolling, baby-kissing and cigar-passing to get."

"And what am I, if it's a fair question?"

"You have a very distinguished position; you are a non-office-holding
stockholder. The only other one is Judge Ledue; as a member of the
judiciary, he did not feel it proper to accept official position in a
private corporation. Tom Brangwyn's Chief of Company Police; Klem
Fawzi is Commander of the Company Guards. And we have a law firm in
Storisende lined up to handle our charter application. Sterber, Flynn
& Chen-Wong. Sterber's married to Jake Vyckhoven's sister, Flynn's son
is married to the daughter of the Secretary of the Treasury, and
Chen-Wong is a nephew of the Chief Justice. All of them are directly
descended from members of Genji Gartner's original crew."

"You don't anticipate any trouble about getting the charter?"

"Not exactly. And Lester Dawes is in Storisende now, trying to find us
a contragravity ship. There are about a dozen in the hands of
receivers for bankrupt shipping companies; he might find one that's
still airworthy. Oh; you remember how I insisted on absolute secrecy
about our Merlin objective? That's working out better than my fondest
expectations. It's leaking like a machine-gunned water tank, and
everybody it leaks to is positive that we know exactly where Merlin is
or we wouldn't be trying to keep it a secret."

Three days later, Conn hitched a ride on a freight-scow to Litchfield.
From the air, he could see a haze of bonfire smoke over High Garden
Terrace, and a gang of men at work. There were more men at work on the
Mall and along the streets on either side. He went up from the yard
below the house, where the scow was being unloaded, and found his
mother in the living room watching a screen play with one eye and
keeping the other on a soulless machine like a miniature contragravity
tank, which was going over the carpet with a vacuum cleaner and taking
swipes at the furniture with a rotary dustmop. She was glad to see
him, and then became troubled.

"Conn, when Flora comes home, you won't argue with her, will you?"

"Only in self-defense." That was the wrong thing to say. He changed it
to, "No; I won't argue with her at all," and then quoted Wade Lucas
quoting Thomas Paine. Then he had to assure his mother a couple of
times that there really was a Merlin, and then assure her that it
wouldn't get loose and hurt anybody if he did find it.

In the middle of his assurances about the harmlessness of Merlin, the
housecleaning-robot began knocking things off the top of a table.

"Oscar! You stop that!" his mother yelled.

Oscar, deaf as the adder, kept on. Conn yelled at his mother to use
her control; she remembered that she had one, a thing like an
old-fashioned pocket watch, around her neck on a chain, and got the
robot stopped.

No wonder she was afraid of Merlin.

He took advantage of the interruption to get to his room and change
clothes, then went up to the hangar and got out an air-cavalry mount.
About fifty men were working on High Garden Terrace, pruning and
trimming and leveling the lawns. There was a big vitrifier on the
Mall--even at five hundred feet he could feel the heat from
it--chuffing and clanking and pouring lavalike molten rock for a new
pavement. And all the nymphs and satyrs and dryads and fauns and
centaurs had had their pedestals rebuilt and were sand-blasted clean.

He landed on the top of the Airlines Building and rode a lift down to
the office where Kurt Fawzi neglected the affairs of his shipline
agency, his brokerage business, and the city of Litchfield. The
afternoon habitues had begun to gather--Raymond Fitch, the
used-vehicles dealer, Lorenzo Menardes, Judge Ledue, Tom Brangwyn,
Klem Zareff. Fawzi was on the screen, talking to somebody with sandy
hair and a suit that didn't seem to be made of any sort of Federation
Armed Forces material, about warehouse facilities. The addresses they
were mentioning were in Storisende.

"No, Leo, I don't know when," Fawzi was saying, "but don't you worry.
You just have space for it, and we'll fill it up. And don't ask me
what sort of stuff. You know what a salvage operation's like; you just
haul out the stuff as you come to it."

Tom Brangwyn, lounging in one of the deep chairs, looked up.

"Hello, Conn. We're having a time. Another two hundred tramps came in
on the _Countess_ this morning, and Ghu only knows how many in their
own vehicles, and they all seem to think if there's work for some
there ought to be work for all, and some of them are getting nasty."

"We can use some more out at the dig. The ones you sent out Thursday
are doing all right, once they found out we weren't taking any
foolishness."

Fawzi turned away from the screen. "Well, Conn, we're in," he said.
"The charter was granted this morning; now we're Litchfield
Exploration & Salvage, Ltd. And Lester Dawes has found us a
contragravity ship."

"How much will it cost us?"

Fawzi began to laugh. "Conn, this'll slay you! She isn't costing us a
centisol. You know those old ships on Mothball Row, back of the old
West End ship docks at Storisende?"

Conn nodded. He'd seen them before he had gone away, and from the

_City of Asgard_ coming in--a lot of old Army Transport craft, covered
with muslin and sprayed with protectoplast. The Planetary Government
had taken them over after the War and forgotten them.

"Well, Lester's getting one of them for us under the old 878
Commercial Enterprise Encouragement Act. She's an Army combat
freighter, regimental ammunition ship. Of course, she still has
armament; we'll have to pay to get that off."

"Why?"

Fawzi looked at him in surprise. "It would only be in the way and add
weight. We want her for a cargo ship, don't we?"

"That's what she was built for. What kind of armament?"

Fawzi didn't know. Klem Zareff did.

"Four 115-mm rifles, two fore and two aft. A pair of lift-and-drive
missile launchers amidships. And a secondary gun battery of 70-mm's
and 50-mm auto-cannon. I know the class; we captured a few of them.
Good ships."

Fawzi was horrified. "Why, that's more firepower than the whole Air
Patrol. Look, the Government won't like our having anything like
that."

"They're giving her to us, aren't they?" Menardes asked.

"Gehenna with what the Government likes!" the old Rebel swore. "If
they'd put a few of those ships into commission, they could wipe out
these outlaws and a private company wouldn't need an armed ship."

"May I use your screen, Kurt?" Conn asked.

When Fawzi nodded, he punched out the combination of the operating
office at Tenth Army, and finally got his father on. He told him about
the ship.

"There's talk about tearing the armament out," he added.

"Is that so, now? Well, I'll call Lester Dawes before he can get
started on it. I think I'll go in to Storisende tomorrow and see the
ship for myself. See what I can do about ammunition for those guns,
too."

"But, Rod," Fawzi protested, joining the conversation, "we don't want
to start a war."

"No. We want to stay out of one. You don't do that by disarming. We're
taking that ship down into the Badlands. Remember?" Rodney Maxwell
said. "Ever hear the name Blackie Perales?"

Fawzi had. He stopped arguing about armament. Instead, he began
worrying about how much the civic clean-up campaign was costing
Litchfield.

"You think we really need that, Rod?"

"Of course we do. You'd be surprised how much labor we're going to
need, and how hard up we're going to be for capable supervisors. This
thing's a training program, Kurt, and we'll need every man we train on
it."

"But it's costing like Nifflheim, Rod. We're going to bankrupt the
city."

"Worse than it is now, you mean? Oh, don't worry, Kurt. As soon as we
find Merlin, everything'll be all right."

Franz Veltrin came in, shortly after Rodney Maxwell was off the
screen. He dropped his audiovisual camera and sound recorder on the
table, laid his pistol-belt on top of them and took a drink of brandy,
downing it with the audible satisfaction of a thirsty horse at a
trough. Then he looked around accusingly.

"Somebody's been talking!" he declared. "I've had all the news
services on the planet on my screen today; they all want the story
about what's happening here. They've heard we know where Merlin is;
that Conn Maxwell found out on Terra."

"They just put two and two together and threw seven," Conn said. "A
_Herald-Guardian_ ship-news reporter interviewed me when I got in, and
found out I'd been studying cybernetics and computer theory on Terra.
What did you tell them?"

"Complete denial. We don't know a thing about Merlin. Naturally, they
didn't believe me. A bunch of them are coming out here tomorrow. What
are we going to tell them? We'll all have to have the same story."

"I," said Judge Ledue, "am not going to be interviewed, I am leaving
town till they're gone."

"Why don't you steer them onto Wade Lucas?" Conn asked. "If you want
anything denied, he'll do it for you."

Everybody thought that was a wonderful idea, except Klem Zareff, and
he waited until Conn was ready to go and rode up to the landing stage
with him.

"Conn, I know this Lucas is going to marry your sister," he began,
"but how much do you know about him?"

"Not much. He seems like a nice chap. I don't hold what he said at the
meeting against him. I suppose if I'd come from off-planet, I wouldn't
believe in Merlin either."

"Hah! But doesn't he believe in Merlin?"

"He makes noises like it."

"You know what I think?" Klem Zareff lowered his voice to a whisper.
"I think he's a Federation spy! I think the Federation's lost Merlin.
That's why they haven't come back to get it long ago."

"Pretty big thing to mislay."

"It could happen. There'd only be a few scientists and some high staff
officers who'd know where it was. Well, say they all went back to
Terra on the same ship, and the ship was lost at space. Sabotage, one
of our commerce raiders that hadn't heard the War was over, maybe just
an ordinary accident. But the ship's lost, and the location of
Merlin's lost with her."

"That could happen," Conn agreed seriously.

"All right. So ever since, they've had people here, listening,
watching, spying. This Lucas; he showed up here about a year after you
went to Terra. And who does he get engaged to? Your sister. And what
does he do here? Goes around arguing that there is no Merlin, getting
people to argue with him, getting them mad, so they'll blurt out
anything they know. I'm an old field officer; I know all the
prisoner-interrogation tricks in the book, and that's always been one
of the best."

"Then why did he act the way he did at the meeting? All he did there
was cut himself off from learning anything more from any of us. In his
place, would you have done that? No; you'd have tried to take the lead
in hunting for Merlin yourself. Now wouldn't you?"

Zareff was silent, first puzzled, and then hurt. Now he would have to
tear the whole idea down and build it over.

Flora was quite friendly when she came home from school. She'd found
out, somewhere, that Conn had been the originator of the municipal
face-lifting project. He was tempted, briefly, to tell her a little,
if not all, of the truth about the Maxwell Plan, then decided against
it. The way to keep a secret was to confide it to nobody; every time
you did, you doubled, maybe even squared, the chances of exposure.

He told his father, when Rodney Maxwell came in from the dig, about
his talk with Klem Zareff.

"How long's he been like that, anyhow?" he asked.

"As long as I've known him. When it comes to melons and wine and
bossing tramp labor and taking care of his money and coming in out of
the rain, Klem Zareff's as sane as I am. But on the subject of the
Terran Federation, he's crazy as a bedbug. What is a bedbug, anyhow?"

"They have them on Terra, in places like Tramptown. They have places
like Tramptown on Terra, too."

"Uhuh. I suppose, in Klem's boots, I'd be just as crazy as he is,"
Rodney Maxwell said. "One minute, he had a wife and two children in
Kindelburg, on Ashmodai, and the next minute Kindelburg was a puddle
of radioactive slag."

"That was in '51, wasn't it? I read about it," Conn said. "It was a
famous victory."

That was from a poem, too.

Rodney Maxwell flew to Storisende early the next morning. Conn rode
back to Tenth Army on an empty scow and pitched into the job of
getting the stores and equipment out of the underground shelters. More
farm-tramps arrived, and had to be pounded into obedience and taught
the work. At the same time, Litchfield was getting a steady influx of
job-seekers, and a secondary swarm of thugs, grifters and gangsters
who followed them. Klem Zareff, having gotten all his melons pressed,
came out to Tenth Army, where he selected fifty of the best men from
the work-gangs and began drilling them as soldiers to guard the next
operation. The manual of arms, drill and salute he taught them was, of
course, System States Alliance.

A week later, the ship arrived from Storisende; a hundred and sixty
feet, three thousand tons, small enough to be berthed inside a
hyperspace transport, and fast enough to get a load of ammunition to
troops at the front, unload, and get out again before the enemy could
zero in on her, and armed to fight off any Army Air Force combat
craft. The delay had been in recruiting officers and crew. The captain
and chief engineer were out-of-work shipline officers, the gunner was
a former Federation artillery officer, and the crew looked more like
pirates than most pirates did.

They christened her the _Lester Dawes_, because Dawes had secured her
and because the name began with the initials of Litchfield Exploration &
Salvage. From then on, it was a race to see whether the Tenth Army
attack-shelters would be emptied before the wine was all pressed, or
vice versa.




VII


Fifty-two years before, they had come to the mesa in the Badlands and
dug a pit on top of it, a thousand feet in diameter and more than five
hundred deep, and in it they built a duplicate of the headquarters for
Third Fleet-Army Force Command. They built a shaft a hundred feet in
diameter like a chimney at one side, and they ran a tunnel out through
solid rock to the head of a canyon half a mile away. Then they buried
the whole thing. Twelve years later, when the War was over, they
sealed both entrances and went away and left it.

For a month each winter, cold rains from the east lashed the desert;
for the rest of the year, it was swept by windblown sand. Wiregrass
sprouted, and thornbush grew; Nature, the master-camoufleur, completed
the work of hiding the forgotten headquarters. Little things not
unlike rabbits scampered over it, and bigger things, vaguely foxlike,
hunted them. Hunted men came, too, their aircars skimming low. None of
them had the least idea what was underneath.

The mesa-top came suddenly to life, just as the sun edged up out of
the east. Conn and his father and Anse Dawes came in first, in the
recon-car with which they had scouted and photographed the site a few
days before. They circled at a thousand feet, fired a smoke bomb, and
then let down near where Conn's map showed the head of the vertical
shaft. The rest followed, first a couple of combat cars that circled
slowly, scanning the ground, and then the _Lester Dawes_ with her big
guns and her load of equipment, and behind a queue of boats and scows
and heavy engineering equipment on contragravity and troop carriers
full of workmen and guards, flanked by air cavalry, which circled
above while everything else landed, then scattered out over a
fifty-mile radius. Occasionally there was a hammering of machine guns,
either because somebody saw something on the ground that might need
shooting at or simply because it was a beautiful morning to make a
noise.

The ship settled quickly and daintily, while Conn and Anse and Rodney
Maxwell sat in the car and watched. Immediately, she began opening
like a beetle bursting from its shell, large sections of armor
swinging outward. Except for the bridge and the gun turrets, almost
the whole ship could be opened; she had been designed to land in the
middle of a battle and deliver ammunition when seconds could mean the
difference between life and death. Jeeps and lifters and manipulators
and things floated out of her. Scows began landing and unloading
prefab-hut elements. A water tank landed, and the cook-shed began
going up beside it; a lorry came in with scanning and probing
equipment, and a couple of men jumped off and huddled over a
photoprint copy of one of Conn's maps.

Conn lifted the car again and coasted it half a mile to where the
cleft in the mesa started. There were half a dozen claw-armed
manipulators already there, and two giant power shovels. Jerry Rivas
and one of the engineers Kurt Fawzi had hired had gotten out of a jeep
and were looking at another photoprint of the map. Rivas pointed to
the head of the canyon, where a mass of rock had slid down.

"That's it; you can still see where they put off the shots."

The canyon was long enough and wide enough for the _Lester Dawes_
to land in it; she could be loaded directly from the tunnel. The
manipulators began moving in, wrestling with the larger chunks of
rock and dragging or carrying them away. Power shovels began grunting
and clanking and rumbling; dust rose in a thick column. Toward
midmorning, the troop carriers which served as school buses in
Litchfield arrived, loaded with more workmen. A lorry lettered
STORISENDE HERALD-GUARDIAN came in, hovered over the canyon, and
began transmitting audiovisuals. More news-folk put in an appearance.

The earth and rock at the top of the tunnel entrance fell away,
revealing the vitrified stone lintel; everybody cheered and dug
harder. More aircars arrived, getting in each other's and everybody
else's way. Raymond Fitch, Lester Dawes, Lorenzo Menardes and Morgan
Gatworth. Dolf Kellton, playing hookey from school. Kurt Fawzi; he
landed in the canyon and watched every shovelful of rock lifted, as
though trying to help with mental force. Tom Brangwyn, with a score of
the Home Guard to reinforce the Company Police. Klem Zareff called in
his air cavalry to help control the sightseers. Nobody was making
trouble; they were just getting in the way.

At eleven, Rodney Maxwell went aboard the _Lester Dawes_ to use the
radio and telescreen equipment. By then, two time zones west in
Storisende, the Claims Office was opening; he filed preliminary claim
to an underground installation with at least two entrances in
uninhabited country, and claimed a ten-mile radius around it. By that
time, the gang working on top had uncovered a vitrified slab over the
hundred-foot circle of the vertical shaft and were cracking it with
explosives. According to the scanners, it was full of loose rubble for
a hundred feet down. Below that, the microrays hit something
impenetrable.

Toward midafternoon, the tunnel in the canyon was cleared. It had been
vitrified solid; the scanners reported that it was plugged for ten
feet. A contragravity tank let down in front of it, with a solenoid
jackhammer mounted where the gun should have been, and began pounding,
running a hole in for a blast shot. There were more explosions
topside; when Conn took a jeep up to observe progress there, he found
the vitrified rock blown completely off the vertical shaft, exposing
the rubble that had been dumped into it. The gang on the mesa-top had
discovered something else; a grid of auro-copper bussbars buried four
feet underground. Ten to one, radio and telescreen signals would be
transmitted to that from below, and then probably picked up and
rebroadcast from a relay station on one or another of the high buttes
in the neighborhood. Time enough to look for that later. He returned
to the canyon, where the lateral tunnel was now almost completely
open.

When it was clear, they sent a snooper in first. It was a robot,
looking slightly like a short-tailed tadpole, six feet long by three
feet at the thickest. It transmitted a view of the tunnel as it went
slowly in; the air, it found, was breathable, and there were no
harmful radiations or other dangers. According to the plans, there
should be a big room at the other end, slightly curved, a hundred feet
wide by a hundred on either side of the tunnel entrance. The robot
entered this, and in its headlight they could see reconnaissance-cars,
and contragravity tanks with 90-mm guns. It swerved slightly to the
left, and then the screen stopped receiving, the telemetered
instruments went dead and the robot's signal stopped.

"Tom," Rodney Maxwell said, "you keep the crowd back. Klem, stay with
the screens; I'll transmit to you. I'm going in to see what's wrong."

He started to give Conn an argument when he wanted to accompany him.

"No," Conn said. "I'm going along. What do you think I went to Terra
to study robotics for?"

His father snapped on the screen and pickup of the jeep that was
standing nearby. "You getting it, Klem?" he asked. "Okay, Conn. Let's
go."

Half a mile ahead, at the other end of the tunnel, they could see a
flicker of light that grew brighter as they advanced. The snooper
still had its light on and was moving about. Once they caught a
momentary signal from it. As Rodney Maxwell piloted the jeep, Conn
kept talking to Klem Zareff, outside. Then they were at the end of the
tunnel and entering the room ahead; it was full of vehicles, like the
one on the bottom level at Tenth Army HQ. As soon as they were inside,
Klem Zareff's voice in the radio stopped, as though the set had been
shot out.

"Klem! What's wrong? We aren't getting you," his father was saying.

The snooper was drifting aimlessly about, avoiding the parked
vehicles. Conn used the manual control to set it down and deactivate
it, then got out and went to examine it.

"Take the jeep over to the tunnel entrance," he told his father.
"Move out into the tunnel a few feet; relay from me to Klem."

The jeep moved over. A moment later his father cried, "He's getting
me; I'm getting him. What's the matter with the radio in here? The
snooper's all right, isn't it?"

It was. Conn reactivated it and put it up above the tops of the
vehicles.

"Sure. We just can't transmit out."

"But only half a mile of rock; that set's good for more than that.
It'll transmit clear through Snagtooth."

"It won't transmit through collapsium."

His father swore disgustedly, repeating it to Zareff outside. Conn
could hear the old soldier, in the radio, make a similar remark. They
should have all expected that, in the first place. If the Third Force
High Command was expecting to sit out a nuclear bombardment in this
place, they'd armor it against anything.

"Bring the gang in; it's safe as far as we've gotten," his father
said. "We'll just have to string wires out."

Conn used his flashlight and found the power unit for the room lights;
all the overhead lights were wired to one unit, if wired were the word
for gold-leaf circuits cemented to the walls and covered with
insulating paint. For the heavy stuff, like the ventilator fans,
they'd have to find the central power plant. He looked around the big
room, poking into some of the closets that lined it. Radiation-proof
clothing. Tools. Arms and ammunition. First-aid kits. Emergency
rations. All the vehicles were plated in shimmering collapsium.

The crowd started coming in: the work-gangs selected for the first
exploration work, most of them old hands of Rodney Maxwell's; the
engineers they had recruited; Mohammed Matsui--he had a gang of his
own, the same one he had been using in tearing down the converter at
Tenth Army; the stockholders and officials; the press. And everybody
else Tom Brangwyn's police hadn't been able to keep out.

The power plant was at the extreme bottom; Matsui began looking it over
at once. Above it they found the service facilities--air-and-water
plant; pumps for the artesian well; sewage disposal. Then repair ships,
and a laboratory, and laundries and kitchens above that.

"Where do you suppose it is?" Kurt Fawzi was asking. "Up at the very
top, I suppose. Let's go up and work down; I can't wait till we've
found it."

Like a kid on Christmas Eve, Conn thought. And there was no Santa
Claus, and Christmas had been abolished.

The place was built in concentric circles, level above level. Combat
equipment nearest the tunnel exit and nearest the vertical shaft, and
ambulances and decontamination units and equipment for relief and
rebuilding next. Storerooms, mile on circular mile of them. Not the
hasty packrat cramming he'd seen at Tenth Army; everything had been
brought in in order, carefully piled or racked, and then left. More
stores for the next three levels up; then living quarters. Enlisted
men's and women's quarters, no signs of occupancy. Enlisted kitchens
and mess halls, untouched.

Most of the officers' quarters were similarly unused, but here and
there some had been occupied. A sloppily made bed. A used cake of soap
in the bathroom. An empty bottle in a closet. Officers' commissary
stores had been used from and replaced; the officers' mess hall and
kitchen had been in constant use, and the officers' club had a
comfortably scuffed and lived-in look. There had been a few people
there all the time of the War.

"Men and women, all officers or civilians," Klem Zareff said. "Didn't
even have enlisted men to cook for them. And we haven't found a scrap
of paper with writing on it, or an inch of recorded sound-tape or
audiovisual film. Remember those big wire baskets, down at the
mass-energy converters? Before they left, they disintegrated every
scrap of writing or recording. This is where Merlin is; they were the
people who worked with it."

And above, offices. General Staff. War Planning, with an incredibly
complex star-map of the theater of war. Judge Advocate General.
Inspector General. Service of Supply. They were full of computers,
each one firing the hopes of people like Fawzi and Dolf Kellton and
Judge Ledue, but they were only special-purpose machines, the sort to
be found in any big business office. The Storisende Stock Exchange
probably had much bigger ones.

Then they found big ones, rank on rank of cabinets, long consoles
studded with lights and buttons, programming machines.

"It's Merlin!" Fawzi almost screamed. "We've found it!"

One of the reporters who had followed them in snatched his radio
handphone from his belt and jabbered, then, realizing that the
collapsium shielding kept him from getting out with it, he replaced it
and bolted away.

"Hold it!" Conn yelled at the others, who were also becoming
hysterical. "Wait till I take a look at this thing."

They managed to calm themselves. After all, he should know what it
was; wasn't that why he'd gone to school on Terra? They followed him
from machine to machine, first hopefully and then fearfully. Finally
he turned, shaking his head and feeling like the doctor in a film
show, telling the family that there's no hope for Grandpa.

"This is not Merlin. This is the personnel-file machine. It's taped
for the records and data of every man and woman in the Third Force for
the whole War. It's like the student-record machine at the
University."

"Might have known it; this section in here's marked G-1 all over
everything; that's personnel. Wouldn't have Merlin in here," Klem
Zareff was saying.

"Well, we'll just keep on hunting for it till we do find it," Kurt
Fawzi said. "It's here somewhere. It has to be."

The next level up was much smaller. Here were the offices of the top
echelons of the Force Command Staff. They, unlike the ones below, had
been used; from them, too, every scrap of writing or film or
record-tape had vanished.

Finally, they entered the private office of Force-General Foxx Travis.
It had not only been used, it was in disorder. Ashtrays full, many of
the forty-year-old cigarette ends lipstick tinted. Chairs shoved
around at random. Three bottles on the desk, with Terran bourbon
labels; two empty and one with about an inch of whisky left in it. But
no glasses.

That bothered Conn. Somehow, he couldn't quite picture the commander
and staff of the Third Fleet-Army Force passing bottles around and
drinking from the neck. Then he noticed that the wall across the room
was strangely scarred and scratched. Dropping his eye to the floor
under it, he caught the twinkle of broken glass. They had gathered
here, and talked for a long time. Then they had risen, for a final
toast, and when it was drunk, they had hurled their glasses against
the wall and smashed them.

Then they had gone out, leaving the broken glass and the empty
bottles; knowing that they would never return.




VIII


Before they returned to the lower level into which the lateral tunnel
entered, Matsui and his gang had the power plant going; the ventilator
fans were humming softly, and whenever they pressed a starting button,
the escalators began to move. They got the pumps going, and the
oxygen-generators, and the sewage disposal system. Until the
communication center could be checked and the relay station found,
they ran a cable out to the _Lester Dawes_, landed in the canyon, and
used her screen-and-radio equipment. Before the Claims Office in
Storisende closed, Rodney Maxwell had transmitted in recorded views of
the interior, and enough of a description for a final claim. They also
received teleprint copies of the Storisende papers. The first story,
in an extra edition of the _Herald-Guardian_, was headlined,
MERLIN FOUND! That would have been the reporter who bolted
off prematurely when they first saw the personnel record machines.
Conn wondered if he still had a job. A later edition corrected this,
but was full of extravagant accounts of what had been discovered.
Merlin or no Merlin, Force Command Duplicate was the biggest
abandoned-property discovery since the Third Force left the
Trisystem.

The camp they had set up on top of the mesa was used, that night, only
by Klem Zareff's guards. Everybody else was inside, eating cold
rations when hungry and, when they could keep awake no longer, bedding
down on piles of blankets or going up to the barracks rooms above.

The next day they found the relay station which rebroadcast signals
from the buried aerial--or wouldn't one say, sub-terrial--on top of
the mesa. As Conn had expected, it was on top of a high butte three
and a half miles to the south; it had been so skillfully camouflaged
that none of the outlaw bands who roamed the Badlands had found it.
After that, Force Command Duplicate was in communication with the rest
of Poictesme.

They moved into the staff headquarters at the top; Foxx Travis's
office, tidied up, became the headquarters for the company officials
and chief supervisors. The workmen quartered themselves in the
enlisted barracks, helping themselves liberally to anything they
found. The crowds of sightseers kept swarming in, giving Tom
Brangwyn's police plenty to do. Tom himself turned the marshal's
office in Litchfield over to his chief deputy. Klem Zareff insisted on
more men for his guard force. A dozen gunboats, eighty-foot craft
mounting one 90-mm gun, several smaller auto-cannon and one
missile-launcher, had been found; he took them over immediately,
naming them for capital ships of the old System States Navy. It took
some argument to dissuade him from repainting all of them black and
green. He kept them all in the air, with a swarm of smaller airboats
and combat-cars, circling the underground headquarters at a radius of
a hundred miles. These patrols reported a general exodus from the
region. At least a dozen outlaw bands, all with fast contragravity,
had been camped inside the zone. Some fled at once; the rest needed
only a few warning shots to send them away. Other bands, looking like
legitimate prospecting parties, began to filter into the Badlands.
Zareff came to Rodney Maxwell--instead of Kurt Fawzi, the titular head
of the company, which was significant--to find out what policy
regarding them would be.

"Well, we have no right to keep them out, as long as they stay outside
our ten-mile radius," Conn's father said. "And as we're the only
thing that even looks like law around here, I'd say we have an
obligation to give them protection. Have your boats investigate them;
if they're legitimate, tell them they can call on us for help if they
need it."

Conn protested, privately.

"There's a lot of stuff around here, in small caches," he said.
"Equipment for guerrilla companies, in event of invasion. When work
slacks off here, we could pick that stuff up."

"Conn, there's an old stock-market maxim: 'A bear can make money
sometimes, and a bull can make money sometimes, but in the long run, a
hog always loses.' Let the other people find some of this; it'll all
help the Plan. Fact is, I've been thinking of leaking some
information, if I can do it without Fawzi and that gang finding out.
Do you know a good supply depot or something like that, say over on
Acaire, or on the west coast? Big enough to be important, and to start
a second prospectors' rush away from us."

"How about one of those hospitals?"

"No; not a hospital. We might use them to talk Wade Lucas into joining
us. A lot of medical stores would be a good bait for him. I'm afraid
he's going to make trouble if we don't do something about him."

"Well, how about engineering and construction equipment? I know where
there's a lot of that, down to the southwest."

"That's farming country; that stuff'll be useful down there. I'll do
that."

The next morning, Rodney Maxwell scorched the stratosphere to
Storisende in his recon-car. The day after he got back, there was a
big discovery of engineering equipment to the southwest and, as he had
anticipated, a second rush of prospectors. They had the vertical shaft
clear now, and the _Lester Dawes_ was shuttling back and forth between
Force Command Duplicate and Storisende. Other ships were coming in,
now, mostly privately owned freighting ships. They bought almost
anything, as fast as it came out.

The stock market had been paralyzed for a couple of days after the
discovery of Force Command; nobody seemed to know what to sell and
what to hold. Now it was going perfectly insane. Twenty or thirty new
companies were being formed; unlike Litchfield Exploration & Salvage,
they were all offering their stock to the public. A week after the
opening of Force Command, the Stock Exchange reported the first
half-million-share day since the War. A week after that, there were
two million-share days in succession.

Some of the L. E. & S. stockholders who had come out on the first day
began drifting back to Litchfield. Lester Dawes was the first to
defect; there was nothing he could do at Force Command, and a great
deal that needed his personal attention at the bank. Morgan Gatworth
and Lorenzo Menardes and one or two others followed. Kurt Fawzi,
however, refused to leave. Merlin was somewhere here at Force Command,
he was sure of it, and he wasn't leaving till it was found. Neither
were Franz Veltrin or Dolf Kellton or Judge Ledue. Tom Brangwyn
resigned as town marshal; Klem Zareff was too busy even to think of
Merlin; he had almost as many men under his command, and twice as much
contragravity, as he had had when the System States Alliance Army had
surrendered.

Conn flew to Litchfield, and found that the public works project had
come to a stop at noon of the day when Force Command was entered, and
that nothing had been done on it since. The cold vitrifier was still
standing in the middle of the Mall, and topside Litchfield was
littered in a dozen places with forsaken equipment and half-completed
paving. There was no one in Kurt Fawzi's office in the Airlines
Building, and the employment office was jammed with migratory workers
vainly seeking jobs.

He hunted up Morgan Gatworth, the lawyer.

"Can't some of you get things started again?" he wanted to know. "This
place is worse than it was before they started cleaning up."

"Yes, I know." Gatworth walked to an open window and looked down on
the littered Mall. "But everybody just dropped everything as soon as
you opened Force Command. Kurt Fawzi's not been back here since."

"Well, you're here. Lester Dawes and Lorenzo Menardes are here. Why
don't you just take over. Kurt Fawzi couldn't care less what you do;
he's forgotten he is mayor of Litchfield. He's forgotten there is a
Litchfield."

"Well, I don't like to just move into the mayor's office and take
over...."

From somewhere below, a submachine gun hammered. There were yells,
pistol shots, and the submachine gun hammered again, a couple of short
bursts.

"Some of the farm-tramps who can't get jobs, trying to steal something
to eat, I suppose," Conn commented. Gatworth was frowning
thoughtfully. He'd only need one more, very slight, push. "Why don't
you talk to Wade Lucas. He's got brains, and he's honest--nobody but
an honest man would have made himself as unpopular as Lucas has. If
you pretend to be disillusioned with this Merlin business it might
help convince him."

"He was blaming you and your father for what's been going on here in
the last two weeks. Yes. He'd help get things straightened out."

At home, he found his mother simply dazed. She was happy to see him,
and solicitous about his and his father's health. It seemed at times,
though, as if he were somebody she had never met before. Events had
gotten so far beyond her that she wasn't even trying to catch up.

Flora, returning from school, stopped short when she saw him.

"Well! I hope you like what you've done!" she greeted him.

"For a start, yes."

"For a start! You know what you've done?"

"Yes. I don't know what you think I've done, though. Tell me."

"You've turned everything into a madhouse; you've sent this whole
world Merlin-crazy. Look at the stock market...."

"You look at it. All I can see is a pack of lunatics playing Russian
roulette with five chambers loaded out of six. Some of this so-called
stock that's being peddled around isn't worth five millisols a
share--Seekers for Merlin, Ltd., closed today at a hundred and
seventy. You notice, there isn't any L. E. & S. being traded. If you
don't believe me, talk to Lester Dawes; he'll tell you what we think
of this market."

"Well, it's your fault!"

"In part it's my fault that any of these quarter-wits have any money
to play the market with. They wouldn't have money enough to play a
five-centisol slot machine if we hadn't gotten a little business
started."

There was just a little truth to that, too. A few woolen socks were
coming out from under mattresses, and a few tin cans were being
exhumed in cellars, since the new flood of Federation equipment and
supplies had gotten on the market. He'd seen a freshly lettered sign
on Len Yeniguchi's tailor shop: QUARTER PRICE IN FEDERATION
CURRENCY.

That night, however, he had one of the nightmares he used to have as a
child--a dream of climbing up onto a huge machine and getting it
started, and then clinging, helpless and terrified, unable to stop it
as it went faster and faster toward destruction.

Klem Zareff's patrols were encountering larger outlaw bands, the
result of gang mergers. They were fighting with prospecting parties,
and prospecting parties were fighting one another. Much of this was
making the newscasts. One battle, between two regularly chartered
prospecting companies, lasted three days, with an impressive casualty
list.

Public demands were growing that the Planetary Government do something
about the situation; the Government was wondering what to do, or how.
There were indignant questions in Parliament. Finally, the Government
dragged a couple of armed ships off Mothball Row--a combat freighter
like the _Lester Dawes_, and a big assault transport--and began trying
to get them into commission.

And, of course, the market boom was still on. The newscasts were full
of that, too. He had started worrying about _if_ a bust came; now he
was worrying about what would happen _when_ it did. Another good
reason for wanting to get to Koshchei and getting a hypership built;
when the bust came, he and his father would want one, very badly.

In any case, it was time to begin getting an expedition ready for
Barathrum Spaceport. Quite a few of the new companies had large
contragravity craft, and the nascent Planetary Air Navy was
approaching a state of being. He wanted to get out there before
anybody else did.

Maybe if they got the hypership built soon enough, it would start a
second, sound boom that would cushion the crash of the present
speculative market when it came, as come it must.

He talked to Klem Zareff about borrowing a couple of the eighty-foot
gunboats. Zareff's attitude was automatically negative.

"We mustn't weaken our defense-perimeter; we'd be inviting disaster.
Why, this whole country in here is simply swarming with outlaws. They
fired on one of our gunboats, the _Werewolf_, yesterday."

He'd heard about that; somebody had launched a missile from the
ground, and the _Werewolf_ had detonated it with a counter-missile. It
had probably been some legitimate prospecting company who'd taken the
L. E. & S. craft for a pirate.

"And there was a battle down in the Devil's Pigpen day before
yesterday."

That had been outlaws; they had been annihilated by something calling
itself Seekers for Merlin, Ltd., whose stock was still skyrocketing on
the Exchange. He mentioned that.

"These other prospecting companies are doing a lot of our
outlaw-fighting for us, and as long as the country's full of small
independent parties, the outlaws go after them and leave us alone."

"Yes, and I have my doubts about a lot of these prospecting companies,
and a lot of the outlaws, too," Zareff said. "I think a lot of both
are Federation agents; they're waiting till we find Merlin, and then
they'll all jump us."

"Well," Conn adjusted his argument to the old Rebel's obsession, "I'll
admit that, as a possibility. If so, we'll need heavier weapons than
we have. This spaceport on Barathrum might be just the place to get
them."

"Yes. It might. Defense armament, and stored ships' weapons. Say, if
we grab that place and move all the heavy guns and missiles here, we
could stand off anybody." The thought of a fight with minions of the
Terran Federation seemed to have shaved ten years off his age in a
twinkling. "You take the _Lester Dawes_, and, let's say, three of
these gunboats. Let me see. _Goblin_, Fred Karski. And _Vampire_,
Charley Gatworth. And _Dragon_, Stefan Jorisson. They're all good men.
Home Guard; trained them myself."

"Aren't you coming, Colonel?"

"Oh, I'd like to, Conn, but I can't. I don't want to be away from
here; no telling what might happen. But you keep in constant
screen-contact; if you get into any trouble, I'll come with everything
I can put into the air."




IX


Barathrum was a grim land, naked black and gray. Spines and crags of
bare rock jutted up, lava-flows like black glaciers twisting among
them. It was split by faults and fissures, pimpled with ash-cones.
Except for the seabirds that nested among the cliffs and the few thin
patches of green where seeds windblown from the mainland had taken
root, it was as lifeless as when some ancient convulsion had thrust it
up from the sea, Barathrum was a dead Inferno, untenanted even by the
damned; by comparison, the Badlands seemed lushly fertile.

The four craft crossed above the line of white breakers that marked
the division of sea and land; the gunboat _Goblin_ in the lead, her
sisters, _Vampire_ and _Dragon_ to right and left and a little behind,
and the _Lester Dawes_ a few miles in the rear. Fred Karski was at the
_Goblin's_ controls; Conn, beside him, was peering ahead into the
teleview screen and shifting his eyes from it to the map and back
again.

Somebody behind him was saying that it would be a nice place to be
air-wrecked. Somebody else was telling him not to joke about it. From
the radio, his father was asking: "Can you see it, yet?"

"Not yet. We're on the right map-and-compass direction; we should
before long."

"We're picking up radiation," Fred Karski said. "Way above normal
count. I hope the place isn't hot."

"We're getting that, too," Rodney Maxwell said. "Looks like power
radiation; something must be on there."

After forty years, that didn't seem likely. He leaned over to look at
the omnigeiger, then whistled. If that was normal leakage from
inactive power units, there must be enough of them to power ten towns
the size of Litchfield.

"Something's operating there," he said, and then realized what that
meant. Somebody had beaten them to the spaceport. That would be one of
the new companies formed after the opening of Force Command. He was
wishing, now, that he hadn't let himself be talked out of coming here
first. Older and wiser heads indeed!

Fred Karski whistled shrilly into his radio phone. "Attention
everybody! General alert. Prepare for combat; prepare to take
immediate evasive action. We must assume that the spaceport is
occupied, and that the occupants are hostile. Captain Poole, will you
please make ready aboard your ship? Reduce both speed and altitude,
and ready your guns and missiles at once."

"Well, now, wait a minute, young fellow," Poole began to argue. "You
don't know--"

"No. I don't. And I want all of us alive after we find out, too,"
Karski replied.

Rodney Maxwell's voice, in the background, said something
indistinguishable. Poole said ungraciously, "Well, all right, if you
think so...."

The _Lester Dawes_ began dropping to the rear and going down toward
the ground. Conn returned to the teleview screen in time to see the
truncated cone of the extinct volcano rise on the horizon, dwarfing
everything around it. Fred Karski was talking to Colonel Zareff, back
at Force Command, giving him the radiation count.

"That's occupied," the old soldier replied. "Mass-energy converter
going. Now, Fred, don't start any shooting unless you have to, but
don't get yourself blown to MC waiting on them to fire the first
shot."

The dark cone bulked higher and higher in the screen. It must be seven
miles around the crater, and a mile deep; when that thing blew out,
ten or fifteen thousand years ago, it must have been something to see,
preferably from a ship a thousand miles off-planet. It was so huge
that it was hard to realize that the jumbled foothills around it were
themselves respectably lofty mountains.

When they were within five miles of it, something twinkled slightly
near the summit. An instant later, the missileman, in his turret
overhead, shouted:

"Missile coming up; counter-missile off!"

"Grab onto something, everybody!" Karski yelled, bracing himself in
his seat.

Conn, on his feet, flung his arms around an upright stanchion and hung
on. Fred's hand gave a twisting jerk on the steering handle; the
_Goblin_ went corkscrewing upward. In the rearview screen, Conn saw a
pink fireball blossom far below. The sound and the shock-wave never
reached them; the _Goblin_ outran them. _Dragon_ and _Vampire_ were
spiraling away in opposite directions. The radio was loud with voices,
and a few of the words were almost printable. A gong began clanging
from the command post on top of the mesa on the mainland.

"Be quiet, all of you!" Klem Zareff was bellowing. "And get back from
there. Back three or four miles; close enough so they won't dare use
thermonuclears. Take cover behind one of those ridges, where they
can't detect you. Then we can start figuring what the Gehenna to do
next."

That made sense. And get it settled who's in command of this
Donnybrook, while we're at it, Conn thought. He looked into the rear
and sideview screens, and taking cover immediately made even more
sense. Two more fireballs blossomed, one dangerously close to the
_Dragon_. Guns were firing from the mountaintop, too, big ones,
and shells were bursting close to them. He saw a shell land on and
another beside one of the enemy gun positions--115-mm's from the
_Lester Dawes_, he supposed. He continued to cling to the
stanchion, and the _Goblin_ shot straight up, and he was expecting
to see the sky blacken and the stars come out when the gunboat leveled
and started circling down again. The mountainside, he saw, was sending
up a lightning-crackling tower of smoke and dust that swelled into a
mushroom top.

Klem Zareff, on the radio, was demanding to know who'd launched that.

"We did, sir; _Dragon_," Stefan Jorisson was replying. "We had to get
rid of it. We took a hit. Gun turret's smashed, Milt Hennant's dead,
and Abe Samuels probably will be before I'm done talking, and if we
get this crate down in one piece, it'll do for a miracle till a real
one happens."

"Well, be careful how you shoot those things off," his father
implored, from the _Lester Dawes_. "Get one inside the crater and we
won't have any spaceport."

The _Lester Dawes_ vanished behind a mountain range a few miles from
the volcano. The _Dragon_, still airborne but in obvious difficulties,
was limping after her, and the _Vampire_ was covering the withdrawal,
firing rapidly but with doubtful effect with her single 90-mm and
tossing out counter-missiles. There was another fireball between her
and the mountain. Then, when the _Dragon_ had followed the _Lester
Dawes_ to safety, she turned tail and bolted, the _Goblin_ following.
As they approached the mountains, something the shape of a recon-car
and about half the size passed them going in the opposite direction.
As they dropped into the chasm on the other side, another nuclear went
off at the volcano.

When Conn and Fred left the _Goblin_ and boarded the ship, they found
Rodney Maxwell, Captain Poole, and a couple of others on the bridge.
Charley Gatworth, the skipper of the _Vampire_, Morgan Gatworth's son,
was with them, and, imaged in a screen, so was Klem Zareff. One of the
other screens, from a pickup on the _Vampire_, showed the _Dragon_
lying on her side, her turret crushed and her gun, with the
muzzle-brake gone, bent upward. A couple of lorries from the _Lester
Dawes_ were alongside; as Conn watched, a blanket-wrapped body, and
then another, were lowered from the disabled gunboat.

"Fred, how are you and Charley fixed for counter-missiles?" Zareff was
asking. "Get loaded up with them off the ship, as many as you can
carry. Charley, you go up on top of this ridge above, and take cover
where you can watch the mountain. Transmit what you see back to the
ship. Fred, you take a position about a quarter way around from where
you are now. Don't let them send anything over, but don't start
anything yourselves. I'm coming out with everything I can gather up
here; I'll be along myself in a couple of hours, and the rest will be
stringing in after me. In the meantime, Rodney, you're in command."

Well, that settled that. There was one other point, though.

"Colonel," Conn said, "I assume that this spaceport is occupied by one
of these new prospecting companies. We have no right to take it away
from them, have we?"

"They fired on us without warning," Karski said. "They killed Milt,
and it's ten to one Abe won't live either. We owe them something for
that."

"We do, and we'll pay off. Conn, you assume wrong. This gang's been at
the spaceport long enough to get the detection system working and put
the defense batteries on ready. They didn't do that since this
morning, and up to last evening they neglected to file claim. I'll
assume they're on the wrong side of the law. They're outlaws, Conn.
All the raids along the east coast; everybody's blamed them on the
Badlands gangs. I'll admit they're responsible for some of it, but
I'll bet this gang at the spaceport is doing most of it."

That was reasonable. Barathrum was closer to the scene of the worst
outlaw depredations than the Badlands, not more than an hour at Mach
Two. And nobody ever thought of Barathrum as an outlaw hangout. People
rarely thought of Barathrum at all. He liked the idea. The only thing
against it was that he wanted so badly to believe it.

They brought the body of Milt Hennant aboard, and Abe Samuels, swathed
in bandages and immobilized by narcotic injections. A few more of the
_Dragon_'s six-man crew had been injured. Jorrisson, the skipper, had
one trouser leg slit to the belt and his right thigh splinted and
bandaged; he took over the _Lester Dawes_' missile controls, which he
could manage sitting in one place. Fred Karski and Charley Gatworth
went aboard their craft and lifted out.

For a long time, nothing happened. Conn got out the plans of the
volcano spaceport and the photomaps of the surrounding area. The
principal entrance, the front door of the spaceport, was the crater of
the extinct volcano itself. It was ringed, outside, with
launching-sites and gun positions, and according to the data he had,
some of the guns were as big as 250-mm. How many outlaws there were to
man them was a question a lot of people could get killed trying to
answer. The ship docks and shops were down on the level of the crater
floor, in caverns, both natural and excavated, that extended far back
into the mountain. There were two galleries, one above the other,
extending entirely around the inside of the crater near the top;
passages from them gave access to the outside gun and missile
positions.

With a dozen ships the size of the _Lester Dawes_, about five thousand
men, and a CO who wasn't concerned with trivialities like casualties,
they could have taken the place in half an hour. With what they had,
trying to fight their way in at the top was out of the question.

There was another way in. He had known about it from the beginning,
and he was trying desperately to think of a way not to utilize it. It
was a tunnel two miles long, running into some of the bottom workshops
and storerooms back of the ship berths from a big blowhole or small
crater at the foot of the mountain. According to the fifty-year-old
plans, it was big enough to take a gunboat in, and on paper it looked
like a royal highway straight to the heart of the enemy's stronghold.

To Conn, it looked like a wonderful place to commit suicide. He'd only
had a short introductory course, in one semester, in military and
protective robotics, just enough to give him a foundation if he wanted
to go into that branch of the subject later. It was also enough to
give him an idea of the sort of booby-traps that tunnel could be
filled with. He knew what he'd have put into it if he'd been defending
that place.

Colonel Zareff had sent one last message from Force Command when he
lifted off with a flight of recon-cars. After that, he maintained a
communication blackout. It was an hour and a half before he got close
enough to be detected from the outlaw stronghold. Immediately, the
volcano began spewing out missiles. Poole hastily took the _Lester
Dawes_ ten miles down the rift-valley in sixty seconds, while Stefan
Jorisson put out a nuclear-warhead missile and left it circling about
where the ship had been. From their respective positions, Fred Karski
and Charley Gatworth filled the airspace midway to the volcano with
counter-missiles, each loaded with four rockets. There were
explosions, fireballs in the air and rising cumulus clouds of
varicolored smoke and dust. Only about half the enemy missiles reached
the _Lester Dawes'_ former position.

When their controllers, back at the volcano, couldn't see the ship in
their screens, the missiles bunched together. Immediately, Jorisson
sent his missile up to join them and detonated it. Including his own,
eight nuclear weapons went off together in a single blast that shook
the ground like an earthquake and churned the air like a hurricane.
Klem Zareff came on-screen at once.

"Now what did you do?" he demanded. "Blew the whole place up, didn't
you?"

Rodney Maxwell told him. Zareff laughed. "They might just think they
got the ship; all the pickups would be smashed before they could see
what really happened. You're about ten miles south of that? Be with
you in a few minutes."

They got a screen on for his rearview pickup. Zareff had with him a
dozen recon-cars, some of them under robo-control; six gunboats
followed, and behind them, to the horizon, other craft were strung
out--airboats, troop carriers, and freight-scows. They could see enemy
missiles approaching in Zareff's front screen; counter-missiles got
most of them, and a couple of pilotless recon-cars were sacrificed.
The _Lester Dawes_ blasted more missiles as they crossed the top of
the mountain range. Then Zareff's car was circling in and entering at
one of the ship's open cargo-ports. Zareff and Anse Dawes got out.

"Gunboats are only half an hour behind," Zareff said. "Get some
screens on to them, Anse; you know the combinations. Now let's see
what kind of a mess we're in here."

It was almost a miracle, the way the tottering old man Conn had seen
on the dock at Litchfield when he had arrived from Terra had been
rejuvenated.

The rest of the reinforcements arrived slowly, sending missiles and
counter-missiles out ahead of them. Zareff began worrying about the
supply; the enemy didn't seem to be running short. By 1300--Conn noted
the time incredulously; the battle seemed to have been going on
forever, instead of just four hours--the _Lester Dawes_ had moved
halfway around the volcano and was almost due west of it, and the
eight gunboats were spaced all around the perimeter. Then one stopped
transmitting; in the other screens, there was a rising fireball where
she had been. The radio was loud with verbal reports.

"_Poltergeist_," Zareff said, naming half a dozen names. One or two of
them had been schoolmates of Conn's at the Academy; he knew how he'd
feel about it later, but now it simply didn't register.

"They're launching missiles faster than we can shoot them down," he
said.

"That's usually the beginning of the end," Zareff said. "I saw it
happen too often during the War. We've got to get inside that place.
It's a lot of harmless fun to send contragravity robots out to smash
each other, but it doesn't win battles. Battles are won by men,
standing with their feet on the ground, using personal weapons."

"We'll have to win this one pretty soon," Rodney Maxwell said. "The
amount of nuclear energy we've been releasing will be detectable
anywhere on the planet by now. The Government has a ship like the
_Lester Dawes_ in commission; if this keeps on, she'll be coming out
for a look."

"Then we'll have help," Captain Poole said.

"We need Government help like we need the polka-dot fever," Rodney
Maxwell said. "If they get in it, they'll claim the spaceport
themselves, and we'll have fought a battle for nothing."

Well, that was it, then. The spaceport was essential to the Maxwell
Plan. He'd gotten seven men killed--eight, if the recon-car that was
taking Abe Samuels to the hospital in Litchfield didn't make it in
time--and it was up to him to see that they hadn't died for nothing.
He spread the photo-map and the spaceport plans on the chart table.

"Look at this," he said.

Klem Zareff looked at it. He didn't like it any better than Conn had.
He studied the plan for a moment, chewing his cigar.

"You know, it's possible they don't know that thing exists," he said,
without too much conviction. "You'll be betting the lives of at least
twenty men; fewer than that couldn't accomplish anything."

"I'll be putting mine on the table along with them," Conn said. "I'll
lead them in."

He was wishing he hadn't had to say that. He did, though. It was the
only thing he could say.

"You better pick the men to go with me, Colonel," he continued. "You
know them better than I do. We'll need working equipment, too; I have
no idea what we may have to take out of the way, inside."

"I won't call for volunteers," Zareff said. "I'll pick Home Guards;
they did their volunteering when they joined."

"Let me pick one man, Colonel," Anse Dawes said. "I'll pick me."




X


They sent a snooper in first; it picked up faint radiation leakage
from inactive power units of overhead lights, and nothing else. The
tunnel stretched ahead of it, empty, and dark beyond its infrared
vision. After it had gone a mile without triggering anything, the jeep
followed, Anse Dawes piloting and Conn at the snooper controls
watching what it transmitted back. The two lorries followed, loaded
with men and equipment, and another jeep brought up the rear. They had
cut screen-and-radio communication with the outside; they weren't even
using inter-vehicle communication.

At length, the snooper emerged into a big cavern, swinging slowly to
scan it. The walls and ceiling were rough and irregular; it was
natural instead of excavated. Only the floor had been leveled smooth.
There were a lot of things in it, machinery and vehicles, all battered
and in poor condition, dusty and cobwebbed: the spaceport junkheap. A
passage, still large enough for one of the gunboats, led deeper into
the mountain toward the crater. They sent the snooper in and, after a
while, followed.

They came to other rectangular, excavated caverns. On the plans, they
were marked as storerooms. Cases and crates, indeterminate shrouded
objects; some had never been disturbed, but here and there they found
evidence of recent investigation.

Beyond was another passage, almost as wide as the Mall in Litchfield;
even the _Lester Dawes_ could have negotiated it. According to the
plans, it ran straight out to the ship docks and the open crater
beyond. Anse turned the jeep into a side passage, and Conn recalled
the snooper and sent it ahead. On the plan, it led to another natural
cavern, half its width shown as level with the entrance. The other
half was a pit, marked as sixty feet deep; above this and just under
the ceiling, several passages branched out in different directions.

The snooper reported visible light ahead; fluoroelectric light from
one of the upper passages, and firelight from the pit. The
air-analyzer reported woodsmoke and a faint odor of burning oil. He
sent the snooper ahead, tilting it to look down into the pit.

A small fire was burning in the center; around it, in a circle, some
hundred and fifty people, including a few women and children, sat,
squatted or reclined. A low hum of voices came out of the soundbox.

"Who the blazes are they?" Anse whispered. "I can't see any way they
could have gotten down there."

They were in rags, and they weren't armed; there wasn't so much as a
knife or a pistol among them. Conn motioned the lorries and the other
jeep forward.

"Prisoners," he said. "I think they were hauled down here on a scow,
shoved off, and left when the fighting started. Cover me," he told the
men in the lorries. "I'm going down and talk to them."

Somebody below must have heard something. As Anse took the jeep over
and started floating it down, the circle around the fire began moving,
the women and children being pushed to the rear and the men gathering
up clubs and other chance weapons. By the time the jeep grounded, the
men in the pit were standing defensively in front of the women and
children.

They were all dirty and ragged; the men were unshaven. There was a
tall man with a grizzled beard, in greasy coveralls; another man with
a black beard and an old Space Navy uniform, his head bandaged with a
dirty and blood-caked rag; another in the same uniform, wearing a cap
on which the Terran Federation insignia had been replaced by the
emblem of Transcontinent & Overseas Shiplines and the words CHIEF.
And beside the tall man with the gray beard, was a girl
in baggy trousers and a torn smock. Like the others, she was dirty,
but in spite of the rags and filth, Conn saw that she was beautiful.
Black hair, dark eyes, an impudently tilted nose.

They all looked at him in hostility that gradually changed to
perplexity and then hope.

"Who are you?" the tall man with the gray beard asked. "You're none of
this gang here."

"Litchfield Exploration & Salvage; I'm Conn Maxwell."

That meant nothing; none of them had been near a news-screen lately.

"What's going on topside?" the man with the bandaged head and the four
stripes on his sleeve asked. "There was firing, artillery and
nuclears, and they herded us down here. Have you cleaned the bloody
murderers out?"

"We're working on it," Conn said. "I take it they aren't friends of
yours?"

Foolish Question of the Year; they all made that evident.

"They took my ship; they murdered my first officer and half my crew
and passengers...."

"They burned our home and killed our servants," the girl said. "They
kidnapped my father and me...."

"They've been keeping us here as slaves."

"It's the Blackie Perales gang," the tall man with the gray beard
said. "They've been making us work for them, converting a blasted tub
of a contragravity ship into a spacecraft. I beg your pardon, Captain
Nichols; she was a fine ship--for her intended purpose."

"You're Captain Nichols?" Anse Dawes exclaimed. "Of the _Harriet
Barne_?"

"That's right. The _Harriet Barne's_ here; they've been making us work
on her, to convert her to an interplanetary craft, of all idiotic
things."

"My name's Yves Jacquemont," the man with the gray beard said. "I'm a
retired hyperspace maintenance engineer; I had a little business at
Waterville, buying, selling and rebuilding agricultural machinery.
This gang found out about me; they raided and burned our village and
carried me and my daughter, Sylvie, away. We've been working for them
for the last four months, tearing Captain Nichols' ship down and
armoring her with collapsium."

"How many pirates are there here?"

That started an argument. Nobody was quite sure; two hundred and fifty
seemed to be the highest estimate, which Conn decided to play safe by
accepting.

"You get us out of here," Yves Jacquemont was saying. "All we want is
a chance at them."

"How about arms? You can't do much with clubs and fists."

"Don't worry about that; we know where to get arms. The treasure
house, where they store their loot. There's plenty of arms and
ammunition, and anything else you can think of. They've used us to
help stow the stuff; we know where it is."

"Anse, you remember those scows we saw, in the big room before we came
to the broad passage? Take four men in the jeep; have them lift two of
them and bring them here. Then, you get out to the end of the tunnel
and call the _Lester Dawes_. Tell them what's happened, tell them they
can get gunboats all the way in, and wait to guide them when they
arrive."

When Anse turned and climbed into the jeep, he asked Yves Jacquemont:
"Why does this Perales want an interplanetary ship?"

"He's crazy!" Jacquemont swore. "Paranoid; megalomaniac. He talks of
organizing all the pirates and outlaws on the planet into one band and
making himself king. He's heard that there are Space Navy superweapons
on Koshchei--I suppose there are, at that--and he wants to get a lot
of planetbusters and hellburners and annihilators." He lowered his
voice. "Captain Nichols and I were going to fix up something that'd
blow the _Harriet Barne_ up as soon as he got her out of atmosphere."

He talked for a while to Jacquemont and his daughter Sylvie, and to
Nichols and the chief engineer, whose name was Vibart. There was
evidently nothing else at the spaceport of which a spaceship could be
built, but there were foundries and rolling-mills and a
collapsed-matter producer. The _Harriet Barne_ was gutted, half torn
down, and half armored with new collapsium-plated sheet steel. It
might be possible to continue the work on her and take her to space.

Then the two scows floated over the top of the pit and began letting
down. They got the prisoners into them, the combat-effective men in
one and the women and children in the other. At the top, he took over
the remaining jeep, getting Jacquemont, his daughter, and the two
contragravityship officers in with him.

"Up to the top," Jacquemont said. "Take the middle passage, and turn
right at the next intersection."

As they approached the section where the pirates stored their loot,
the sound of guns and explosions grew louder, and they began picking
up radio and screen signals, all of which were scrambled and
incomprehensible. The pirates, in different positions, talking among
themselves. With all that, it ought to be safe to use their own
communication equipment; nobody would notice it.

The treasure room looked like a giant pack rat's nest. Cases and
crates of merchandise, bales, boxes, barrels. Machinery. Household and
industrial robots. The prisoners piled out of the two scows and began
rummaging. Somebody found a case of cigarettes and smashed it open; in
a moment, cartons were being tossed around and opened, and everybody
was smoking. The pirates evidently hadn't issued any tobacco rations
to their prisoners.

And they found arms and ammunition, began ripping open cases, handing
out rifles, pistols, submachine guns. The prisoners grabbed them even
more hungrily than the cigarettes. Sylvie Jacquemont took charge of
the ammunition; she had three men opening boxes for her, while she
passed out boxes of cartridges and made sure that everybody had
ammunition to fit their weapons. A ragged man who might have been a
farm-tramp or a rich planter before his capture had gotten a bale of
cloth open and was tossing rags around while the chief engineer
inspected weapons and showed people how to clean out the cosmoline and
fill their spare magazines.

Conn collected a few of his own party.

"Let's look these robots over," he said. "Find about half a dozen we
can load with blasting explosive and send ahead of us on
contragravity."

They found several--an electric-light servicer, a couple of
wall-and-window washers, a serving-robot that looked as if it had come
from a restaurant, and an all-purpose robo-janitor. In the passage
outside, they began loading the lorries with bricks of ionite and
packages of cataclysmite, packing all the scrap-iron and other junk
around the explosives that they could. As soon as they had weapons,
the prisoners came swarming out, making more noise than was necessary
and a good deal more than was safe. Sylvie Jacquemont, with a
submachine gun slung from one shoulder and a canvas bag of spare
magazines from the other, came over to see what he was doing.

"Well, look what you're doing to him!" she mock-reproached. "That's a
dirty trick to play on a little robot!"

He grinned at her. "You and my mother would get along. She always
treats robots like people."

"Well, they are, sort of. They aren't alive--at least, I don't think
they are--but they do what you tell them, and they learn tricks, and
they have personalities."

That was true. He didn't think robots were alive, either, though
biophysics professors tended to become glibly evasive when pinned down
to defining life. Robots could learn, if you used the term loosely
enough. And any robot with more than five hundred hours service picked
up a definite and often exasperating personality.

"I've been working with them, and tearing them down and fixing them,
ever since I was in pigtails," she added.

The half-dozen natural leaders among the prisoners--Jacquemont and his
daughter, the two _Harriet Barne_ officers, and a couple of
others--bent over the photoprinted plans Conn had, located their
position, and told him as much as they could about what lay ahead.
Sylvie Jacquemont could handle robots; she would ride in the front
seat of the jeep while he piloted. Vibart, the chief engineer, and
Yves Jacquemont would ride behind. Nichols would ride in the scow with
the fighting men. One lorry of his own party would follow the jeep;
the other would bring up the rear.

He snapped on the screen and punched the ship combination. Stefan
Jorisson appeared in it.

"Hi, Conn! You all right?" He raised his voice. "Conn's on-screen!"

His father appeared at Jorisson's shoulder and, a moment later, Klem
Zareff.

"Well, we're in, all right," he said. "We just picked up an army,
too." He swung the jeep to get the crowd in the pickup, explaining who
they were. "Did you hear from Anse?"

"Yes, he just screened in," Rodney Maxwell said. "He said a gunboat
can get in."

"That's right; clear into the crater."

"Well, we're going to put three of them inside," Zareff told him.
"_Werewolf_, _Zombi_, and _Dero_. And a troop carrier with fifty men;
flamethrowers, portable machine guns, bomb-launchers; regular
special-weapons section. What can you do where you are?"

"Here? Nothing. We're going to work around to the other side of the
crater, and then find a vertical shaft and go up topside and make as
much disturbance as we can."

"That's it!" Zareff approved. "Pull them off balance; as soon as we
get in, we'll go straight to the top. Look for us in about an hour;
it's going to take time getting to the tunnel-mouth without being
spotted from above."

He lifted the jeep and started off; the lorry, and the scows and the
other lorry, followed; the snooper and the bomb-robots went ahead like
a pack of hunting dogs. They went through great chambers, dark and
silent and bulking with dusty machines. Jacquemont explained that the
prisoners had never gotten into this section; the _Harriet Barne_ was
a mile or so to their right. Conn turned left, when the noise of
firing from outside became plainer. A foundry. A machine-shop which
seemed to have been abandoned in the middle of some rush job that
hadn't really been necessary. They came to a place even the snooper
couldn't enter, choked to the ceiling with dead vegetation, hydroponic
seed-plants that had been left untended to grow wild and die. They
emerged into outside light, in vast caves a mile high and open onto
the crater, and looked across the floor that had been leveled and
vitrified to the other side, three and a half miles away.

He didn't know whether to be more awed by the original eruption that
had formed the crater or by the engineering feat of carving these
docks and ship-berths, big enough for the hugest hyperspaceship, into
it.

At first, he had been afraid of getting into position too soon before
the task force from outside could profit by the diversion. Then he
began to worry about the time it was taking to get halfway around the
crater. He could hear artillery thundering continuously above. Except
at the very beginning of the battle, there had been little gunfire. He
wondered if both sides were running out of lift-and-drive missiles, or
if the fighting had gotten too close for anybody to risk using nuclear
weapons.

He was also worrying about the women and children among the released
prisoners.

"Why did the pirates bother with them?" he asked Sylvie.

"They used the women and some of the old men to do housekeeping
chores for them," she said. "Mostly, though, they were hostages; if
the men didn't work, Perales threatened to punish the women and
children. I wasn't doing any housework; I'm too good a mechanic. I was
helping on the ship."

"Well, what'll I do with them when the fighting starts? I can't take
them into battle."

"You'll have to; it'll be the safest place for them. You can't leave
them anywhere and risk having them recaptured."

"That means we'll have to detach some men to cover them, and that'll
cut our striking force down." He whistled at the sound-pickup of his
screen and told his father about it. "What do I do with these people,
anyhow?"

"You're the officer in command, Conn," his father told him. "Your
decision. How soon can you attack? We're almost through to the
crater."

"There's a vertical shaft right above us, and a lot of noise at the
top. We'll send up a couple of bomb-robots to clear things at the
shaft-head and follow with everything we have."

"Noncombatants and all?"

He nodded. "Only thing we can do." An old quotation occurred to him.
"'If you want to make an omelet, you have to break eggs.'"

He wondered who'd said that in the first place. One of the old
Pre-Atomic conquerors; maybe Hitler. No, Hitler would have said, "If
you want to make sauerkraut, you have to chop cabbage." Maybe it was
Caesar.

"We'd better send Gumshoe Gus up, first," Sylvie suggested.

"You handle him. Take a quick look around, and then pull him back.
We'll need him later." It was the first time he'd ever caught himself
calling a robot "him," instead of "it." He thought for a second, and
added: "Give your father and Mr. Vibart the controls for the two
window-washers; you handle the snooper."

He gave more instructions: Yves Jacquemont to turn his bomb-robot
right, Vibart to turn his left; the two lorries to follow the jeep up
the shaft, the scows to follow. Then he leaned back and looked at the
screens that had been rigged under the top of the jeep. A circle of
light appeared in one, growing larger and brighter as the snooper
approached the top of the shaft; two more came on as the bomb-robots
followed.

"All right; follow me," he said into the inter-vehicle radio, and
started the jeep slowly up the shaft.

The snooper popped out of the shaft, onto a gallery that had been cut
into the solid rock, fifty feet high and a hundred and fifty across,
with a low parapet on the outside and the mile-deep crater beyond.
There were a few grounded aircars and lorries in sight, and a medium
airboat rested a hundred or so feet on the right of the shaft-opening.
Fifteen or twenty men were clustered around it, with a lifter loaded
with ammunition. They looked like any crowd of farm-tramps. Suddenly,
one of them saw the snooper, gave a yell, and fired at it with a
rifle. Sylvie pulled it back into the shaft; her father and the chief
engineer sent the two bomb-robots up onto the gallery. The right-hand
robot sped at the airboat; the last thing Conn saw in its screen was a
face, bearded and villainous and contorted with fright, looking out
the pilot's window of the airboat. Then it went dead, and there was a
roar from above. On the other side, several men were firing straight
at the pickup of the other robot; it went dead, too, and there was a
second explosion.

In the communication screen, somebody was yelling, "Give them another
one for Milt Hennant!" and his father was urging him to get in fast,
before they recovered.

In peace or war, screen communication was a wonderful thing. The only
trouble was that it let in too many kibitzers.

The gallery, when the jeep emerged onto it, was empty except for
casualties, a few still alive. The side of the airboat was caved in;
the lifter-load of ammunition had gone up with the bomb. He moved the
jeep to the right of the shaft and waited for the vehicles behind him,
suffering a brief indecision.

  _Never divide your force in the presence of the enemy._

There had been generals who had done that and gotten away with it, but
they'd had names like Foxx Travis and Robert E. Lee and
Napoleon--Napoleon; that was who'd made that crack about omelets!
They'd known what they were doing. He was playing this battle by ear.

There was a lot of shouting ahead to the right. That meant live
pirates, a deplorable situation which ought to be corrected at once.
The communication screen was noisy, now; his father had gotten to the
top gallery with the three gun cutters, and was meeting resistance. He
formed his column, his jeep and one of the lorries in front, the scows
next, and the second lorry behind, and started around the gallery
counterclockwise, the snoopers and the three remaining bomb-robots
ahead. They began running into resistance almost at once.

Bullets spatted on the armor glass in front of him, spalling it and
blotching it with metal until he found that he could steer better by
the show-back of his view-pickup. He used that until the pickup was
shot out. Then his father began wanting to know, from the
communication screen, what was going on and where he was. A bomb or
something went off directly under the jeep, bouncing it almost to the
ceiling; he found that it was impossible to lift it again after it
settled to the floor of the gallery, and they all piled out to fight
on foot. Sommers and his gang from the number one lorry were also
afoot; their vehicle had been disabled. He saw them lifting wounded
into one of the scows.

They blew up the light-service robot to clear a nest of pirates who
had taken cover ahead of them. They sent the robo-janitor up a side
passage and exploded it in a missile-launching position on the outside
of the mountain; that produced a tremendous explosion. They began
running out of cartridges, and had to stop and glean more from enemy
casualties. They expended their last bomb-robot, the restaurant
server, to break up another pirate resistance point.

At length he found himself, with Sylvie and her father and one of the
Home Guardsmen from Sommers' lorry, lying behind an aircar somebody
had knocked out with a bazooka, with two dead pirates for company and
a dozen distressingly live ones ahead behind an improvised barricade.
Behind, there was frantic firing; the rear-guard seemed to have run
into trouble, probably from some gang that had come down from the
upper level. He wondered what his father was doing with the gunboats;
since abandoning the jeep, he had lost his only means of contact.

Suddenly, the men in front jumped up from their barricade and came
running toward him. Been reinforced, now they're counterattacking. His
rifle was empty; he drew his pistol and shot one of them, and then he
saw that they were throwing up their hands and yelling for quarter.
This was something new.

He looked around quickly, to make sure none of the liberated prisoners
except Jacquemont and his daughter were around, and then called to a
couple of his own men to come up and help him. While they were
relieving the pirates of their pistol belts and cartridge bandoliers,
more came up, their hands over their heads, herded by a combat car
from which Tom Brangwyn covered them with a pair of 12-mm machine
guns. Tom hadn't put in an appearance before he had taken his commando
force into the tunnel; he hadn't even known the chief of Company
Police was on Barathrum.

"Well, nice seeing you," he greeted. "How did you get in?"

"Over the top," Brangwyn told him. "Everything's caved in on the other
side. We have a quarter of the top gallery, and half of this one. Your
father's cleaning up above. Klem's got some men working along the
outside."

Sylvie was tugging at his arm. "Hey, look! Look at that!" she was
clamoring. "Who's she belong to?"

He looked; the _Lester Dawes_ was coming over the edge of the crater.

"She's ours," he said. "It's all over but the mopping up. And counting
the egg breakage."




XI


The shooting died down to occasional rattles of small arms, usually
followed by yells for quarter. An explosion thundered from across the
crater. The _Lester Dawes_ fired her big guns a few times. A machine
gun stuttered. A pistol banged, far away. It took two hours before all
the pirates had been hunted out of hiding and captured, or killed if
found by their former captives, who were accepting no surrender
whatever.

Blackie Perales had been one of the latter; he had been found, his
clothes in rags and covered with dirt and grease, hiding under a
machine in one of the shops back of the dock in which the _Harriet
Barne_ was being rebuilt. He had tried to claim that he was one of the
pirates' prisoners who had eluded the roundup at the beginning of the
battle and had been hiding there since. As soon as the real prisoners
saw and recognized him, they had fallen upon him and clubbed, kicked
and stamped him out of any resemblance to humanity. At that, what he
got was probably only a fraction of what he deserved.

The egg breakage had been heavy, and not at all confined to the bad
eggs. A third gunboat, the _Banshee_, had been destroyed with all
hands during the final attack from outside; in addition, a dozen men
had been killed during the fighting in the galleries. Everybody was
shocked, except Klem Zareff, who had been in battles before. He was
surprised that the casualties had been so light.

At first glance, the spaceport looked like a handsome prize of
victory. The docks and workshops were all in good condition; at worst,
they only needed cleaning up. There was a collapsium plant, with its
own mass-energy converter. There were foundries and machine-shops and
forging-shops and a rolling-mill, almost completely robotic. At first,
Conn thought that it might be possible to build a hyperdrive ship
here, without having to go to Koshchei at all.

Closer examination disabused him of this hope. There was nothing of
which the framework of a ship could be built, and no way of producing
heavy structural steel. The rolling-mill was good enough to turn out
eighth-inch sheet material which when plated with a few micromicrons
of collapsium would be as good as a hundred feet of lead against
space-radiations, but that was the ship's skin. A ship needed a
skeleton, too. The only thing to do was go on with the _Harriet
Barne_.

It was sunset before he finished his tour of inspection and let his
jeep down in a vehicle hall off the lower gallery outside what had
originally been the spaceport officers' club. It was crowded, and a
victory celebration seemed to be getting under way. He saw his father
with Yves Jacquemont, Sylvie, Tom Brangwyn, and Captain Nichols.
Nichols had gotten clean clothes from the pirates' store of loot, and
had bathed and shaved. So had Jacquemont, though he had contented
himself with trimming his beard. It took him a second or so to
recognize the young lady in feminine garb as his erstwhile battle
comrade, Sylvie.

"Well, our pay goes on from the day we were captured," Nichols was
saying. "My instructions are to resume command of the ship. Tomorrow,
they're sending a party out to go over her."

Conn stopped short. "What's this about the ship?"

"Captain Nichols was in screen contact with his company's office in
Storisende," Rodney Maxwell said. "They're continuing him in command
of her."

"But ... but we took that ship! We lost three gunboats and about
twenty-five men...."

"She still belongs to Transcontinent & Overseas," his father said.
"That's been the law on stolen property as long as there's been any
law."

Of course; he should have known that. Did know it; just didn't think.

"We broke an awful lot of eggs for no omelet; fought a battle for
nothing."

"Well, of course, I'm prejudiced," Sylvie said, "but I don't think
getting us out of the hands of that bloodthirsty maniac and his
cutthroats was nothing."

"Wiping out the Perales gang wasn't nothing, Conn," Tom Brangwyn said.
"You got no idea at all how bad things were, the last couple of
years."

"I know. I'm sorry." He was ashamed of himself. "But I needed a ship,
and now we have no ship at all."

"A ship means something to you?" Yves Jacquemont asked.

"Yes." He told him why. "If we could get to Koshchei, we could build a
hypership of our own, and get our brandy and things to markets where
we could get a decent price for them."

"I know. I was in and out of Storisende on these owner-captain tramps
for a couple of years before I decided to retire and settle here,"
Jacquemont said. "The profit on a cargo of Poictesme brandy on Terra
or Baldur is over a thousand percent."

"Well, don't give up too soon," Nichols advised. "You can't keep the
_Harriet Barne_, of course, but you're entitled to prize-money on her,
and that ought to buy you something you could build a spaceship out
of."

"That's right," Jacquemont said. "Everything else besides the frame
can be made here. Look, these pirates burned me out; except for the
money I have in the bank, I lost everything, home, business and all.
As soon as I can find a place for Sylvie to stay, I'll come back and
go to work for your company building a spaceship. And a lot of the men
who were working here are farm-tramps and drifters, one job's as good
as another as long as they get paid for it. And I know a few good men
in Storisende--engineers--who'd be glad for a job, too."

"You think it would be all right with Mother and Flora if Sylvie
stayed with us?" Conn asked.

"Of course it would; they'd be glad to have her." Rodney Maxwell
turned to Yves Jacquemont. "Let's consider that fixed up. Now,
suppose you and I go into Storisende, and...."

The Transcontinent & Overseas people arrived at Barathrum Spaceport
the next morning; a rear-rank vice-president, a front-rank
legal-eagle, and three engineers. They were horrified at what they
saw. The _Harriet Barne_ had been gutted. Bulkheads and decks had
been ripped out and relocated incomprehensibly; the bridge and the
control room under it were gone; she had been stripped to her framework,
and the whole underside was sheathed in shimmering collapsium.

"Great Ghu!" the vice-president almost howled. "That isn't _our_
ship!"

"That's the _Harriet Barne_," her captain said. "She looks a little
ragged now, but--"

"You helped these pirates do this to her?"

"If I hadn't, they'd have cut my throat and gotten somebody else to
help them. My throat's more valuable to me than the ship is to you; I
can't get anybody to build me a new one."

"Well, understand," one of the engineers said, "they were converting
her into an interplanetary ship. It wouldn't cost much to finish the
job."

"We need an interplanetary ship like we need a hole in the head!" The
vice-president turned to Rodney Maxwell. "Just how much prize-money do
you think you're entitled to for this wreck?"

"I wouldn't know; that's up to Sterber, Flynn & Chen-Wong. Up to the
court, if we can settle it any other way."

"You mean you'd litigate about this?" the lawyer demanded, and began
to laugh.

"If we have to. Look, if you people don't want her, sign her over to
Litchfield Exploration & Salvage. But if you do want her, you'll have
to pay for her."

"We'll give you twenty thousand sols," the lawyer said. "We don't want
to be tightfisted. After all, you fought a gang of pirates and lost
some men and a couple of boats; we have some moral obligation to you.
But you'll have to realize that this ship, in her present state, is
practically valueless."

"The collapsium on her is worth twice that, and the engines are worth
even more," Jacquemont said. "I worked on them."

The discussion ended there. By midafternoon, Luther Chen-Wong, the
junior partner of the law firm, arrived from Storisende with a couple
of engineers of his own. Reporters began arriving; both sides were
anxious to keep them away from the ship. Conn took care of them,
assisted by Sylvie, who had rummaged an even more attractive costume
out of what she called the loot-cellar. The reporters all used up a
lot of film footage on her. And the Fawzis' Office Gang arrived from
Force Command, bitterly critical of the value of the spaceport against
its cost in lives and equipment. Brangwyn and Zareff returned to Force
Command with them. A Planetary Air Patrol ship arrived and removed the
captured pirates. The liberated prisoners were airlifted to
Litchfield.

The third day after the battle, Conn and his father and Sylvie and her
father flew to Litchfield. To Conn's surprise, Flora greeted him
cordially, and Wade Lucas, rather stiffly, congratulated him. Maybe it
was as Tom Brangwyn had said; he hadn't been on Poictesme in the last
four or five years and didn't know how bad things had gotten. His
mother seemed to think he had won the Battle of Barathrum
single-handed.

He was even more surprised and gratified that Flora made friends with
Sylvie immediately. His mother, however, regarded the engineer's
daughter with badly concealed hostility, and seemed to doubt that
Sylvie was the kind of girl she wanted her son getting involved with.
Outwardly, of course, she was quite gracious.

Rodney Maxwell and Yves Jacquemont flew to Storisende the next
morning, both more optimistic about finding a ship than Conn thought
the circumstances warranted. Conn stayed at home for the next few
days, luxuriating in idleness. He and Sylvie tore down his mother's
household robots and built sound-sensors into them, keying them to
respond to their names and to a few simple commands, and including
recorded-voice responses in a thick Sheshan accent. All the smart
people on Terra, he explained, had Sheshan humanoid servants.

His mother was delighted. Robots that would answer when she spoke to
them were a lot more companionable. She didn't seem to think, however,
that Sylvie's mechanical skills were ladylike accomplishments. Nice
girls, Litchfield model, weren't quite so handy with a spot-welder.
That was what Conn liked about Sylvie; she was like the girls he'd
known at the University.

They were strolling after dinner, down the Mall. The air was sharp and
warned that autumn had definitely arrived; the many brilliant stars,
almost as bright as the moon of Terra, were coming out in the dusk.

"Conn, this thing about Merlin," she began. "Do you really believe in
it? Ever since Dad and I came to Poictesme, I've been hearing about
it, but it's just a story, isn't it?"

He was tempted to tell her the truth, and sternly put the temptation
behind him.

"Of course there's a Merlin, Sylvie, and it's going to do wonderful
things when we find it."

He looked down the starlit Mall ahead of him. Somebody, maybe Lester
Dawes and Morgan Gatworth and Lorenzo Menardes, had gotten things
finished and cleaned up. The pavement was smooth and unbroken; the
litter had vanished.

"It's done wonderful things already, just because people started
looking for it," he said. "Some of these days, they're going to
realize that they had Merlin all along and didn't know it."

There was a faint humming from somewhere ahead, and he was wondering
what it was. Then they came to the long escalators, and he saw that
they were running.

"Why, look! They got them fixed! They're running!"

Sylvie grinned at him and squeezed his arm.

"I get you, chum," she said. "Of course there's a Merlin."

Maybe he didn't have to tell her the truth.

When they returned to the house, his mother greeted him:

"Conn, your father's been trying to get you ever since you went out.
Call him, right away; Ritz-Gartner Hotel, in Storisende. It's
something about a ship."

It look a little time to get his father on-screen. He was excited and
happy.

"Hi, Conn; we have one," he said.

"What kind of a ship?"

"You know her. The _Harriet Barne_."

That he hadn't expected. Something off Mothball Row that would have to
be flown to Barathrum and torn down and completely rebuilt, but not
the one that was there already, partly finished.

"How the dickens did you wangle that?"

"Oh, it was Yves' idea, to start with. He knew about her; the T. &
O.'s been losing money on her for years. He said if they had to pay
prize-money on her and then either restore her to original condition
or finish the job and build a spaceship they didn't want, it would
almost bankrupt the company. They got up as high as fifty thousand
sols for prize-money and we just laughed at them. So we made a
proposition of our own.

"We proposed organizing a new company, subsidiary to both L. E. & S.
and T. & O., to engage in interplanetary shipping; both companies to
assign their equity in the _Harriet Barne_ to the new company, the
work of completing her to be done at our spaceport and the labor cost
to be shared. This would give us our spaceship, and get T. & O. off
the hook all around. Everybody was for it except the president of T. &
O. Know anything about him?"

Conn shook his head. His father continued:

"Name's Jethro Sastraman. He could play Scrooge in _Christmas Carol_
without any makeup at all. He hasn't had a new idea since he got out
of college, and that was while the War was still going on.
'Preposterous; utterly visionary and impractical,'" his father
mimicked. "Fortunately, a majority of the big stockholders didn't
agree; they finally bullied him into agreeing. We're calling the new
company Alpha-Interplanetary, we have an application for charter in,
and that'll go through almost automatically."

"Who's going to be the president of this new company?"

"You know him. Character named Rodney Maxwell. Yves is going to be
vice-president in charge of operations; he's flying to Barathrum
tomorrow or the next day with a gang of technicians we're recruiting.
T. & O. are giving us Clyde Nichols and Mack Vibart, and a lot of men
from their shipyard. I'm staying here in Storisende; we're opening an
office here. By this time next week, we're all going to wish we'd been
born quintuplets."

"And Conn Maxwell, I suppose, will be an influential
non-office-holding stockholder?"

"That's right. Just like in L. E. & S."




XII


He found Jerry Rivas and Anse Dawes and a score of workmen making a
survey and inventory of the spaceport. Captain Nichols and four of the
original crew of the _Harriet Barne_, who had shared his captivity
among the pirates, had stayed to take care of the ship. And Fred
Karski, with one gun-cutter and a couple of light airboats, was
keeping up a routine guard. All of them had heard about the formation
of Alpha-Interplanetary when Conn arrived.

The next day, Yves Jacquemont arrived, accompanied by Mack Vibart, a
gang from the T. & O. shipyard, and a dozen engineers and construction
men whom he had recruited around Storisende. More workers arrived in
the next few days, including a number who had already worked on the
ship as slaves of the Perales gang.

It didn't take Conn long to appreciate the problems involved in the
conversion. Built to operate only inside planetary atmosphere and
gravitation, the _Harriet Barne_ was long and narrow, like an old
ocean ship; more than anything else, she had originally resembled a
huge submarine. Spaceships, either interplanetary or interstellar,
were always spherical with a pseudogravity system at the center. This,
of course, the _Harriet Barne_ lacked.

"Well, are we going to make the whole trip in free fall?" he wanted to
know.

"No, we'll use our acceleration for pseudograv halfway, and
deceleration the other half," Jacquemont told him. "We'll be in free
fall about ten or fifteen hours. What we're going to have to do will
be to lift off from Poictesme in the horizontal position the ship was
designed for, and then make a ninety-degree turn after we're
off-planet, with our lift and our drive working together, just like
one of the old rocket ships before the Abbott Drive was developed."

That meant, of course, that the after bulkheads would become decks,
and explained a lot of the oddities he had noticed about the
conversion job. It meant that everything would have to be mounted on
gimbals, everything stowed so as to be secure in either position, and
nothing placed where it would be out of reach in either.

Jacquemont and Nichols took charge of the work on the ship herself.
Chief Engineer Vibart, with a gang of half-taught, self-taught and
untaught helpers, went back to working the engines over, tearing out
all the safety devices that were intended to keep the ship inside
planetary atmosphere, and arranging the lift engines so that they
could be swung into line with the drive engines. There was a lot of
cybernetic and robotic equipment, and astrogational equipment, that
had to be made from scratch. Conn picked a couple of helpers and went
to work on that.

From time to time, he was able to snatch a few minutes to read
teleprint papers or listen to audiovisual newscasts from Storisende.
He was always disappointed. There was much excitement about the new
interplanetary company, but the emphasis was all wrong. People weren't
interested in getting hyperships built, or opening the mines and
factories on Koshchei, or talking about all the things now in short
supply that could be produced there. They were talking about Merlin,
and they were all positive, now, that something found at Force Command
Duplicate had convinced Litchfield Exploration & Salvage that the
giant computer was somewhere off-planet.

Rodney Maxwell flew in from Storisende; he was accompanied by Wade
Lucas, who shook hands cordially with Conn.

"Can you spare us Jerry Rivas for a while?" Rodney Maxwell asked.

"Well, ask Yves Jacquemont; he's vice-president in charge of
operations. As an influential non-office-holding stockholder, I'd
think so. He's only running around helping out here and there."

"We want him to take charge of opening those hospitals you were
telling us about. Wade and I are forming a new company, Mainland
Medical Materials, Ltd. Going to act as broker for L. E. & S. in
getting rid of medical stores. Nobody in the company knows where to
sell that stuff or what we ought to get for it."

Wade Lucas began to talk about how desperately some types of drug and
some varieties of diagnostic equipment were needed. Conn had it on the
tip of his tongue to ask Lucas whether he thought that was a racket,
too. Lucas must have read his mind.

"I really didn't understand how much good this would do," he said. "I
wouldn't have spoken so forcefully against it if I had. I thought it
was nothing but this Merlin thing--"

"Aaagh! Don't talk to me about Merlin!" Conn interrupted. "I have to
talk to Kurt Fawzi and that crowd about Merlin till I'm sick of the
whole subject."

His father shot him a warning glance; Lucas was looking at him in
surprise. He hastened to change the subject:

"I see Len made you a suit out of that material," he said to his
father. "And I see you're not bulging the coat out behind with a
hip-holster."

"Oh, I stopped carrying a gun; I'm a city man, now. Nobody carries one
in Storisende. Won't even be necessary in Litchfield before long. Our
new marshal had a regular reign of terror in Tramptown for a few days,
and you wouldn't know the place. Wade, here, is acting mayor now."

They went back to talking about the new company. "You're going to have
so many companies you won't be able to to keep track of them before
long," Conn said.

"Well, I'm doing something about that. A holding company; Trisystem
Investments, Ltd.; you're a non-office-holding stockholder in that,
too."

Merlin was now a political issue. A bill had been introduced in
Parliament to amend the Abandoned Property Act of 867 and nationalize
Merlin, when and if discovered and regardless by whom. The support
seemed to come from an extremist minority; everybody else, including
the Administration, was opposed to it. There was considerable
acrimony, however, on the propositions: 1) that Merlin was too
important to the prosperity of Poictesme to become a private monopoly;
and 2) that Merlin was too important, etc., to become a political
football and patronage plum.

It was discovered, after they were half assembled, that the controls
for the _Harriet Barne_ would only work while she was in a horizontal
position. The whole thing had to be torn out and rebuilt. There was
also trouble with the air-and-water recycling system. The _City of
Nefertiti_ came in from Aton for Odin; Rodney Maxwell was almost
frantic because they hadn't gotten together a cargo of medical stores
from the first hospital to be opened.

"There's all sorts of stuff," he was fuming, by screen. "Stuff that's
in short supply anywhere and that we could get good prices for
off-planet. Get Federation sols for it, too."

"The _City of Asgard_ will be along in six months," Conn said. "You
can have a real cargo assembled by then. You can make arrangements in
advance to dispose of it on Terra or Baldur or Marduk."

"There are a couple of other companies interested in interplanetary
ships now," his father added. "One of them had gotten four old
freighters off Mothball Row, and they're tearing them down and
cannibalizing them into one spaceship. That work's being done here at
Storisende Spaceport. And another company has gotten title to a couple
of old office buildings and has a gang at work dismantling them for
the structural steel. I think they're going to build a real
spaceship."

That wasn't anything to worry about either. The _Harriet Barne_ was
better than half finished. There was a collapsium plant at Storisende
Spaceport, but Yves Jacquemont said it was only half the size of the
one at Barathrum; it would be three months before it could produce
armor for one, let alone both, ships.

The crackpots were getting into the act, now, too. A spirit medium on
the continent of Acaire, to the north, had produced a communication
purporting to originate with a deceased Third Force Staff officer, now
in the Spirit World. There was considerable detail, all ludicrous to
Conn's professional ear. And a fanatic in one of the small towns on
the west coast was quoting the Bible, the Koran, and the Bhagavadgita
to prove that if Merlin were ever found, Divine vengeance in a
spectacular form would fall not only on Poictesme but on the entire
Galaxy.

The spaceship that was building at Storisende got into the news;
on-screen, it appeared that the work was progressing rapidly. So was
the work of demolishing a block of empty buildings to get girders for
the second ship, on which work had not yet been started. The one under
construction seemed to be of cruciform design, like an old-fashioned
pre-contragravity winged airplane. The design puzzled everybody at
Barathrum. Yves Jacquemont thought that perhaps there would be decks
in the cross-arm which would be used when the ship was running on
combined lift and drive.

"Well, till we can get a shipyard going on Koshchei and build some
real spaceships, there are going to be some rare-looking objects
traveling around the Alpha System. I wonder what the next one's going
to look like--a flying sky-scraper?" Conn said.

"What I wonder," Yves Jacquemont replied, "is where all the old
interplanetary ships got to. There must have been hundreds of them
running back and forth from here to Janicot and Koshchei and Jurgen
and Horvendile during the War. They must have gone somewhere."

"Couldn't they all have been fitted with Dillingham hyperdrive
engines and used in the evacuation?"

"Possible. But the average interplanetary ship isn't very big; five
hundred to seven-fifty feet in diameter. One of those things couldn't
carry more than a couple of hundred people, after you put in all the
supplies and the hydroponic tanks and carniculture vats and so on for
a four- to six-month voyage. I can't see the economy of altering
anything that small for interstellar work. Why, the smallest of these
tramp freighters that come in here will run about fifteen hundred
feet."

They didn't just disintegrate when peace broke out, that was for sure.
And there certainly weren't any of them left on Poictesme. He puzzled
over it briefly, then shoved it aside. He had more important things to
think about.

In his spare time he was studying, along with his other work,
everything he could find on Koshchei, with an intensity he had not
given to anything since cramming for examinations at the University.
There was a lot of it.

The fourth planet of Alpha Gartner was older than Poictesme;
geologists claimed that it was the oldest thing, the sun excepted, in
the system, and astrophysicists were far from convinced that it hadn't
been captured from either Beta or Gamma when the three stars had been
much closer together. It had certainly been formed at a much higher
temperature than Janicot or Poictesme or Jurgen or Horvendile. For
better than a billion years, it had been molten-hot, and it had lost
most of its lighter elements in gaseous form along with its primary
atmosphere, leaving little to form a light-rock crust. All that had
remained had been a core of almost pure iron and a mantle that was
mostly high-grade iron ore.

The same process had gone on, as it cooled, as on any Terra-size
planet. After the surface had started to congeal, gases, mostly carbon
dioxide and water vapor, had come up to form a secondary atmosphere,
the water vapor forming a cloud envelope, condensing, and sending down
rain that returned immediately as steam. Solar radiations and electric
discharges broke some of that into oxygen and hydrogen; most of the
hydrogen escaped into space. Finally, the surface cooled further and
the rain no longer steamed off.

The whole planet started to rust. It had been rusting, slowly, for the
billion or so years that had followed, and almost all the free oxygen
had become locked in iron oxide. The air was almost pure carbon
dioxide. It would have been different if life had ever appeared on
Koshchei, but apparently the right amino acids never assembled. Some
attempts had been made to introduce vegetation after the colonization
of Poictesme, but they had all failed.

Men went to Koshchei; they worked out of doors in oxygen helmets, and
lived in airtight domes and generated their own oxygen. There had been
mines, and smelters, and blast furnaces and steel mills. And there had
been shipyards, where hyperships up to three thousand feet had been
built. They had all been abandoned when the War had ended; they were
waiting there, on an empty, lifeless planet. Some of them had been
built by the Third Fleet-Army Force during the War; most of them dated
back almost a century before that, to the original industrial boom.
All of them could be claimed under the Abandoned Property Act of 867,
since all had been taken over by the Federation, and the original
owners, or their heirs, compensated.

And there was the matter of selecting a crew. As an influential
non-office-holding stockholder in all the companies involved, Conn
Maxwell, of course, would represent them. He would also serve as
astrogator. Clyde Nichols would command the ship in atmosphere, and
act as first mate in space. Mack Vibart would be chief engineer at all
times. Yves Jacquemont would be first officer under Nichols, and
captain outside atmosphere. They had three real space crewmen, named
Roddell, Youtsko and O'Keefe, who had been in Storisende jail as a
result of a riotous binge when their ship had lifted out, six months
before. The rest of the company--Jerry Rivas, Anse Dawes, Charley
Gatworth, Mohammed Matsui, and four other engineers, Ludvyckson,
Gomez, Karanja and Retief--rated as ordinary spacemen for the trip,
and would do most of the exploration work after landing.

They got the controls put up; they would work in either position. The
engines were lifted in and placed. Conn finished the robo-pilot and
the astrogational computers and saw them installed. The air-and-water
recycling system went in. The collapsium armor went on. In the
news-screen, they saw the spaceship at Storisende still far from half
finished, with swarms of heavy-duty lifters and contragravity
machiners around it, and a set of landing-stands, on which the second
ship was to be built, in the process of construction.

A tramp hyperspace freighter landed at Storisende, the _Andromeda_,
five months from Terra, with a cargo of general merchandise. Rodney
Maxwell and Wade Lucas had assembled a cargo of medicines and hospital
equipment which they thought could be sold profitably. They began
dickering with the owner-captain of the hypership.

A farm-tramp down in the tobacco country to the south, evidently
ignorant that the former commander of the Third Force was still alive,
had proclaimed himself to be the reincarnation of Foxx Travis and was
forbidding everybody, on pain of court-martial and firing squad, from
meddling with Merlin. And an evangelist in the west was declaring that
Merlin was really Satan in mechanical shape.

The _Harriet Barne_ was finished. The first test, lifting her to three
hundred miles, turning her bow-up, and taking her another thousand
miles, had been a success. They brought her back and set her down in
the middle of the crater, and began getting the supplies aboard. Kurt
Fawzi, Klem Zareff, Judge Ledue, Franz Veltrin and the others flew
over from Force Command. Sylvie Jacquemont came from Litchfield, and
so did Wade Lucas, Morgan Gatworth, Lester Dawes, Lorenzo Menardes and
a number of others. Neither Conn's mother nor sister came.

"I don't know what's the matter with those two," Sylvie told him.
"They always seem to be scrapping with each other now, and the only
thing they can agree on is that you and your father ought to stop
whatever you're doing, right away. Your mother can't adjust to your
father being a big Storisende businessman, and she says he'll lose
every centisol he has and both of you will probably go to jail, and
then she's afraid you will find Merlin, and Flora's sure you and your
father are swindling everybody on the planet."

"Sylvie, I had no idea things would be like that," he told her
contritely. "I wish I hadn't suggested that you stay there, now."

"Oh, it isn't so bad, so far. Your mother and I get along all right
when Flora isn't there, and Flora and I get along when your mother
isn't around. Mealtimes aren't much fun, though."

His father came out from Storisende, looked the ship over, and seemed
relieved.

"I'm glad you're ready to get off," he said. "You know this hyperspace
freighter, the _Andromeda_? Some private group in Storisende has
chartered her. She's loading supplies now. I have a private detective
agency, Barton-Massarra, trying to find out where's she's going. I
think you'd better get this ship off, right away."

"We have everything aboard, all the supplies and everything,"
Jacquemont told him. "We can lift off tonight."




III


The ship lurched slightly. In the outside screens, the lights around,
the crowd that was waving good-bye, and the floor of the crater began
receding. The sound pickups were full of cheering, and the boom of a
big gun at one of the top batteries, and the recorded and amplified
music of a band playing the traditional "Spacemen's Hymn."

"It's been a long time since I heard that played in earnest,"
Jacquemont said. "Well, we're off to see the Wizard."

The lights dwindled and merged into a tiny circle in the darkness of
the crater. The music died away; the cannon shots became a faint
throbbing. Finally, there was silence, and only the stars above and
the dark land and the starlit sea below. After a long while a sunset
glow, six hours past on Barathrum, appeared in the west, behind the
now appreciable curvature of the planet.

"Stand by for shift to vertical," Captain Nichols called, his voice
echoing from PA-outlets through the ship.

"Ready for shift, Captain Nichols," Jacquemont reported from the
duplicate-control panel.

Conn went to the after bulkhead, leaning his back against it. "Ready
here, Captain," he said.

Other voices took it up. Lights winked on the control panels.

"Shifting over," Nichols said. "Your ship now, Captain Jacquemont."

"Thank you, Mr. Nichols."

The deck began to tilt, and then he was lying on his back, his feet
against the side of the control room, which had altered its shape and
dimensions. There was a jar as the drive went on in line with the new
direction of the lift and the ship began accelerating. He got to his
feet, and he and Charley Gatworth went to the astrogational computer
and began checking the data and setting the course for the point in
space at which Koshchei would be in a hundred and sixty hours.

"Course set, Captain," he reported to Jacquemont, after a while.

A couple of lights winked on the control panel. There was nothing more
to do but watch Poictesme dwindle behind, and listen to the newscasts,
and take turns talking to friends on the planet.

They approached the halfway point; the acceleration rate decreased,
and the gravity indicator dropped, little by little. Everybody was
enjoying the new sense of lightness, romping and skylarking like newly
landed tourists on Luna. It was fun, as long as they landed on their
feet at each jump, and the food and liquids stayed on plates and in
glasses and cups. Yves Jacquemont began posting signs in conspicuous
places:

WEIGHT IS WHAT YOU LIFT, MASS IS WHAT HURTS
WHEN IT HITS YOU.
WEIGHT DEPENDS ON GRAVITY; MASS IS ALWAYS CONSTANT.

His father came on-screen from his office in Storisende. By then,
there was a 30-second time lag in communication between the ship and
Poictesme.

"My private detectives found out about the _Andromeda_," he said.
"She's going to Panurge, in the Gamma System. They have a couple of
computermen with them, one they hired from the Stock Exchange, and one
they practically shanghaied away from the Government. And some of the
people who chartered the ship are members of a family that were
interested in a positronic-equipment plant on Panurge at the time of
the War."

"That's all right, then; we don't need to worry about that any more.
They're just hunting for Merlin."

Some of his companions were looking at him curiously. A little later,
Piet Ludvyckson, the electromagnetics engineer, said: "I thought you
were looking for Merlin, Conn."

"Not on Koschchei. We're looking for something to build a hypership
out of. If I had Merlin in my hip pocket right now, I'd trade it for
one good ship like the _City of Asgard_ or the _City of Nefertiti_,
and give a keg of brandy and a box of cigars to boot. If we had a ship
of our own, we'd be selling lots of both, and not for Storisende
Spaceport prices, either."

"But don't you think Merlin's important?" Charley Gatworth, who had
overheard him, asked.

"Sure. If we find Merlin, we can run it for President. It would make a
better one than Jake Vyckhoven."

He let it go at that. Plenty of opportunities later to expand the
theme.

The gravitation gauge dropped to zero. Now they were in free fall, and
it lasted twice as long as Yves Jacquemont had predicted. There were a
few misadventures, none serious and most of them comic--For example,
when Jerry Rivas opened a bottle of beer, everybody was chasing the
amber globules and catching them in cups, and those who were splashed
were glad it hadn't been hot coffee.

They made their second, 180-degree turnover while weightless. Then
they began decelerating and approached Koshchei stern-on, and the
gravity gauge began climbing slowly up again, and things began
staying put, and they were walking instead of floating. Koshchei grew
larger and larger ahead; the polar icecaps, and the faint dappling of
clouds, and the dark wiggling lines on the otherwise uniform red-brown
surface which were mountain ranges became visible. Finally they began
to see, first with the telescopic screens and then without
magnification, the little dots and specks that were cities and
industrial centers.

Then they were in atmosphere, and Jacquemont made the final shift, to
horizontal position, and turned the ship over to Nichols.

For a moment, the scout-boat tumbled away from the ship and Conn was
back in free fall. Then he got on the lift-and-drive and steadied it,
and pressed the trigger button, firing a green smoke bomb. Beside him,
Yves Jacquemont put on the radio and the screen pickups. He could see
the ship circling far above, and the manipulator-boat, with its
claw-arms and grapples, breaking away from it. Then he looked down on
the endless desert of iron oxide that stretched in all directions to
the horizon, until he saw a spot, optically the size of a
five-centisol piece, that was the shipbuilding city of Port Carpenter.
He turned the boat toward it, firing four more green smokes at
three-second intervals. The manipulator-boat started to follow, and
the _Harriet Barne_, now a distant speck in the sky, began coming
closer.

Below, as he cut speed and altitude, he could see the pock-marks of
open-pit mines and the glint of sunlight on bright metal and
armor-glass roofs, the blunt conical stacks of nuclear furnaces and
the twisted slag-flows, like the ancient lava-flows of Barathrum. And,
he reflected, he was an influential non-office-holding stockholder in
every bit of it, as soon as they could screen Storisende and get
claims filed.

A high tower rose out of the middle of Port Carpenter, with a
glass-domed mushroom top. That would be the telecast station; the
administrative buildings were directly below it and around its base.
He came in slowly over the city, above a spaceport with its empty
landing pits in a double circle around a traffic-control building,
and airship docks and warehouses beyond. More steel mills. Factories,
either hemispherical domes or long buildings with rounded tops.
Ship-construction yards and docks; for the most part, these were
empty, but on some of them the landing-stands of spaceships, like
eight-and ten-legged spiders, waiting for forty years for hulls to be
built on them. A few spherical skeletons of ships, a few with some of
the outer skin on. It wasn't until he was passing close to them that
he realized how huge they were. And stacks of material--sheet steel,
deckplate, girders--and contragravity lifters and construction
machines, all left on jobs that were never finished, the bright
rustless metal dulled by forty years of rain and windblown red dust.
They must have been working here to the very last, and then, when the
evacuation elsewhere was completed, they had dropped whatever they
were doing, piled into such ships as were completed, and lifted away.

The mushroom-topped tower rose from the middle of a circular building
piled level on level, almost half a mile across. He circled over it,
saw an airship dock, and called the _Harriet Barne_ while Jacquemont
talked to Jerry Rivas, piloting the manipulator-boat. Rivas came in
and joined them in the air; they hovered over the dock and helped the
ship down when she came in, nudging her into place.

By the time Conn and Jacquemont and Rivas and Anse Dawes and Roddell
and Youtsko and Karanja were out on the dock in oxygen helmets, the
ship's airlock was opening and Nichols and Vibart and the others were
coming out, towing a couple of small lifters loaded with equipment.

The airlocked door into the building, at the end of the dock, was
closed; when somebody pulled the handle, it refused to open. That
meant it was powered from the central power plant, wherever that was.
There was a plug socket beside it, with the required voltage marked
over it. They used an extension line from a power unit on one of the
lifters to get it open, and did the same with the inner door; when it
was open, they passed into a dim room that stretched away ahead of
them and on either side.

It looked like a freight-shipping room; there were a few piles of
boxes and cases here and there, and a litter of packing material
everywhere. A long counter-desk, and a bank of robo-clerks behind it.
According to the air-analyzer, the oxygen content inside was safely
high. They all pulled off their fishbowl helmets and slung them.

"Well, we can bunk inside here tonight," somebody said. "It won't be
so crowded here."

"We'll bunk here after we find the power plant and get the ventilator
fans going," Jacquemont said.

Anse Dawes held up the cigarette he had lighted; that was all the
air-analyzer he needed.

"That looks like enough oxygen," he said.

"Yes, it makes its own ventilation; convection," Jacquemont said. "But
you go to sleep in here, and you'll smother in a big puddle of your
own exhaled CO_2. Just watch what the smoke from that cigarette's
doing."

The smoke was hanging motionless a few inches from the hot ash on the
end of the cigarette.

"We'll have to find the power plant, then," Matsui, the power-engineer
said. "Down at the bottom and in the middle, I suppose, and anybody's
guess how deep this place goes."

"We'll find plans of the building," Jerry Rivas said. "Any big dig
I've ever been on, you could always find plans. The troubleshooters
always had them; security officer, and maintenance engineer."

There were inside-use vehicles in the big room; they loaded what they
had with them onto a couple of freight-skids and piled on, starting
down a passage toward the center of the building. The passageways were
well marked with direction-signs, and they found the administrative
area at the top and center, around the base of the telecast-tower. The
security offices, from which police, military guard, fire protection
and other emergency services were handled, had a fine set of plans and
maps, not only for the building itself but for everything else in Port
Carpenter. The power plant, as Matsui had surmised, was at the very
bottom, directly below.

The only trouble, after they found it, was that it was completely
dead. The reactors wouldn't react, the converters wouldn't convert,
and no matter how many switches they shoved in, there was no power
output. The inside telemetered equipment, of course, was self-powered.
Some of them were dead, too, but from those which still worked
Mohammed Matsui got a uniformly disheartening story.

"You know what happened?" he said. "When this gang bugged out, back in
854, they left the power on. Now the conversion mass is all gone, and
the plutonium's all spent. We'll have to find more plutonium, and tear
this whole thing down and refuel it, and repack the mass-conversion
chambers--provided nothing's eaten holes in itself after the mass
inside was all converted."

"How long will it take?" Conn asked.

"If we can find plutonium, and if we can find robots to do the work
inside, and if there's been no structural damage, and if we keep at
it--a couple of days."

"All right; let's get at it. I don't know where we'll find shipyards
like these anywhere else, and if we do, things'll probably be as bad
there. We came here to fix things up and start them, didn't we?"




XIV


It didn't take as long as Mohammed Matsui expected. They found the
fissionables magazine, and in it plenty of plutonium, each
subcritical slug in a five-hundred-pound collapsium canister. There
were repair-robots, and they only had to replace the cartridges in the
power units of three of them. They sent them inside the
collapsium-shielded death-to-people area--transmitter robots, to relay
what the others picked up through receptors wire-connected with the
outside; foremen-robots, globes a yard in diameter covered with horns
and spikes like old-fashioned ocean-navy mines; worker-robots, in a
variety of shapes, but mostly looking like many-clawed crabs.

Neither the converter nor the reactor had sustained any damage while
the fissionables were burning out. So the robots began tearing out
reactor-elements, and removing plutonium slugs no longer capable of
sustaining chain reaction but still dangerously radioactive. Nuclear
reactors had become simpler and easier to service since the First Day
of the Year Zero, when Enrico Fermi put the first one into operation,
but the principles remained the same. Work was less back-breaking and
muscle-straining, but it called for intense concentration on screens
and meters and buttons that was no less exhausting.

The air around them began to grow foul. Finally, the air-analyzer
squawked and flashed red lights to signal that the oxygen had dropped
below the safety margin. They had no mobile fan equipment, or time to
hunt any; they put on their fishbowl helmets and went back to work.
After twelve hours, with a few short breaks, they had the reactors
going. Jerry Rivas and a couple of others took a heavy-duty lifter and
went looking for conversion mass; they brought back a couple of tons
of scrap-iron and fed it to the converters. A few seconds after it was
in, the pilot lights began coming on all over the panels. They took
two more hours to get the oxygen-separator and the ventilator fans
going, and for good measure they started the water pumps and the
heating system. Then they all went outside to the ship to sleep. The
sun was just coming up.

It was sunset when they rose and returned to the building. The
airlocks opened at a touch on the operating handles. Inside, the air
was fresh and sweet, the temperature was a pleasantly uniform 75
degrees Fahrenheit, the fans were humming softly, and there was
running hot and cold water everywhere.

Jerry Rivas, Anse Dawes, and the three tramp freighter fo'c'sle hands
took lifters and equipment and went off foraging. The rest of them
went to the communications center to get the telecast station, the
radio beacon, and the inside-screen system into operation. There were
a good many things that had to be turned on manually, and more things
that had been left on, forty years ago, and now had to be repowered or
replaced. They worked at it most of the night; before morning, almost
everything was working, and they were sending a signal across
twenty-eight million miles to Storisende, on Poictesme.

It was late evening, Storisende time, but Rodney Maxwell, who must
have been camping beside his own screen, came on at once, which is to
say five and a half minutes later.

"Well, I see you got in somewhere. Where are you, and how is
everything?"

Then he picked up a cigar out of an ashtray in front of him and lit
it, waiting.

"Port Carpenter; we're in the main administration building," Conn told
him. He talked for a while about what they had found and done since
their arrival. "Have you an extra viewscreen, fitted for recording?"
he asked.

Five and a half minutes later, his father nodded. "Yes, right here."
He leaned forward and away from the communication screen in front of
him. "I have it on." He gave the wave-length combination. "Ready to
receive."

"This is about all we have, now. Views we took coming in, from the
ship and a scout-boat." He started transmitting them. "We haven't sent
in any claims yet. I wasn't sure whether I should make them for
Alpha-Interplanetary, or Litchfield Exploration & Salvage."

"Don't bother sending in anything to the Claims Office," his father
said. "Send anything you want to claim in here to me, and I'll have
Sterber, Flynn & Chen-Wong file them. They'll be made for a new
company we're organizing."

"What? Another one?"

His father nodded, grinning. "Koshchei Exploitation & Development;
we've made application already. We can't claim exclusive rights to the
whole planet, like the old interstellar exploration companies did
before the War, but since you're the only people on the planet, we can
come pretty close to it by detail." He was looking to one side, at the
other screen. "Great Ghu, Conn! This place of yours all together
beats everything I ever dug, Force Command and Barathrum Spaceport
included. How big would you say it is? More than ten miles in radius?"

"About five or six. Ten or twelve miles across."

"That's all right, then. We'll just claim the building you're in, now,
and the usual ten-mile radius, the same as at Force Command. We'll
claim the place as soon as the company's chartered; in the meantime,
send in everything else you can get views of."

They set up a regular radio-and-screen watch after that. Charley
Gatworth and Piet Ludvyckson, both of whom were studying astrogation
in hopes of qualifying as space officers after they had a real
spaceship, elected themselves to that duty; it gave them plenty of
time for study. Jerry Rivas and Anse Dawes, with whomever they could
find to help them, were making a systematic search. They looked first
of all for foodstuffs, and found enough in the storerooms of three
restaurants on the executive level to feed their own party in gourmet
style for a year, and enough in the main storerooms to provision an
army. They even found refrigerators and freeze-bins full of meat and
vegetables fresh after forty years. That surprised everybody, for the
power units had gone dead long ago. Then it was noticed that they were
covered with collapsium. Anything that would stop cosmic rays was a
hundred percent efficient as a heat insulator.

Coming in, the first day, Conn had seen an almost completed hypership
bulking above the domes and roofs of Port Carpenter in the distance.
He saw it again on screen from a pickup atop the central tower. As
soon as the party was comfortably settled in the executive apartments
on the upper levels, he and Yves Jacquemont and Mack Vibart and Schalk
Retief, the construction engineer, found an aircar in one of the
hangars and went to have a closer look at her.

She had all her collapsium on, except for a hundred-foot circle at the
top and a number of rectangular openings around the sides. Yves
Jacquemont said that would be where the airlocks would go.

"They always put them on last. But don't be surprised at anything you
find or don't find inside. As soon as the skeleton's up they put the
armor on, and then build the rest of the ship out from the middle. It
might be slower getting material in through the airlock openings, but
it holds things together while they're working."

They put on the car's lights, lifted to the top, and let down through
the upper opening. It was like entering a huge globular spider's web,
globe within globe of interlaced girders and struts and braces,
extending from the center to the outer shell. Even the spider was
home--a three-hundred-foot ball of collapsium, looking tiny at the
very middle.

"Why, this isn't a ship!" Vibart cried in disgust. "This is just the
outside of a ship. They haven't done a thing inside."

"Oh, yes, they have," Jacquemont contradicted, aiming a spotlight
toward the shimmering ball in the middle. "They have all the engines
in--Abbott lift-and-drive, Dillingham hyperdrives, pseudograv, power
reactors, converters, everything. They wouldn't have put on the
shielding if they hadn't. They did that as soon as they had the
outside armor on."

"Wonder why they didn't finish her, if they got that far," Retief
said.

"They didn't need her. They'd had it; they wanted to go home."

"Well, we're not going to finish her, not with any fifteen men,"
Retief said. "One man has only two hands, two feet and one brain; he
can only handle so much robo-equipment at a time."

"I never expected we'd build a ship ourselves," Conn said. "We came to
look the place over and get a few claims staked. When we've done that,
we'll go back and get a real gang together."

"I don't know where you'll find them," Jacquemont commented. "We'll
need a couple of hundred, and they ought all to be graduate engineers.
We can't do this job with farm-tramps."

"You made some good shipyard men out of farm-tramps on Barathrum."

"And what'll you do for supervisors?"

"You're one. General superintendent. Mack, you and Schalk are a couple
of others. You just keep a day ahead of your men in learning the job,
you'll do all right."

Vibart turned to Jacquemont. "You know, Yves, he'll do it," he said.
"He doesn't know how impossible this is, and when we try to tell him,
he won't believe us. You can't stop a guy like that. All right, Conn;
deal me in."

"I won't let anybody be any crazier than I am," Jacquemont declared,
and then looked around the vastness of the empty ship with its
lacework of steel. "All you need is about ten million square feet of
decks and bulkheads, an air-and-water system, hydroponic tanks and
carniculture vats, astrogation and robo-pilot equipment, about which I
know very little, a hyperspace pilot system, about which I know
nothing at all.... Conn, why don't you just build a new Merlin? It
would be simpler."

"I don't want a new Merlin. I'm not even interested in the original
Merlin. This is what I want, right here."

He told his father, by screen, about the ship. "I believe we can
finish her, but not with the gang that's here. We'll need a couple of
hundred men. Now, with the supplies we've found, we can stay here
indefinitely. Should we do more exploring and claim some more of these
places, or should we come home right away and start recruiting, and
then come back with a large party, start work on the ship, and explore
and make further claims as we have time?" he asked.

"Better come back as soon as possible. Just explore Port Carpenter,
find out what's going to be needed to finish the ship and what
facilities you have to produce it, and get things cleaned up a little
so that you can start work as soon as you have people to do it. I'm
organizing another company--don't laugh, now; I've only started
promotioneering--which I think we will call Trisystem & Interstellar
Spacelines. Get me all the views you can of the ship herself and of
the steel mills and that sort of thing that will produce material for
finishing her; I want to use them in promotion. By the way, has she a
name?"

"Only a shipyard construction number."

"Then suppose you call her _Ouroboros_, after Genji Gartner's old
ship, the one that discovered the Trisystem."

"_Ouroboros II_; that's fine. Will do."

"Good. I'll have Sterber, Flynn & Chen-Wong make application for a
charter right away. We'll have to make Alpha-Interplanetary one of the
stockholding companies, and also Koschchei Exploitation & Development,
and, of course, Litchfield Exploration & Salvage...."

It was a pity there really wasn't a Merlin. If this kept on nothing
else would be able to figure out who owned how much stock in what.

They found the on-the-job engineering office for the ship in a small
dome half a mile from the construction dock. Yves Jacquemont and Mack
Vibart and Schalk Retief moved in and buried themselves to the ears in
specifications and blueprints. The others formed into parties of three
or four, and began looking about production facilities for material.
There was a steel mill a mile from the construction site; it was
almost fully robotic. Iron ore went in at one end, and finished sheet
steel and girders and deck plates came out at the other, and a dozen
men could handle the whole thing. There was a collapsium plant; there
were machine-shops and forging-shops. Every time they finished
inspecting one, Yves Jacquemont would have a list of half a dozen more
plants that he wanted found and examined yesterday morning at the
latest.

Some of them were in a frightful mess; work had been suspended and
everybody had gone away leaving everything as it was. Some were in
perfect order, ready to go into operation again as soon as power was
put on. It had depended, apparently, upon the personal character of
whoever had been in charge in the end. The nuclear-electric power unit
plant was in the latter class. The man in charge of it evidently
hadn't believed in leaving messes behind, even if he didn't expect to
come back.

It was built in the shape of a T. One side of the cross-stroke
contained the cartridge-case plant, where presses formed sheet-steel
cylinders, some as small as a round of pistol ammunition and some the
size of ten-gallon kegs. They moved toward the center on a production
line, finally reaching a matter-collapser where they were plated with
collapsium. From the other side, radioactive isotopes, mostly
reactor-waste, came in through evacuated and collapsium-shielded
chambers, were sorted, and finally, where the cross-arm of the T
joined the downstroke, packed in the collapsium cases. The production
line continued at right angles down the long building in which the
apparatus which converted nuclear energy to electric current was
assembled and packed; at the end, the finished power cartridges came
off, big ones for heavy machines and tiny ones for things like hand
tools and pocket lighters and razors. There were stacks of them, in
all sizes, loaded on skids and ready to move out. Except for the
minute and unavoidable leakage of current, they were as good as the
day they were assembled, and would be for another century.

Like almost everything else, the power-cartridge plant was airtight
and had its own oxygen-generator. The air-analyzer reported the oxygen
insufficient to support life. That was understandable; there were a
lot of furnaces which had evidently been hot when the power was cut
off; they had burned up the oxygen before cooling. They put on their
oxygen equipment when they got out of the car.

"I'll go back and have a look at the power plant," Matsui said. "If
it's like the rest of this place, it'll be ready to go as soon as the
reactors are started. I wish everybody here had left things like
this."

"Well, we'll have to check everything to make sure nothing was left on
when the main power was cut," Conn said. "Don't do anything back there
till we give you the go-ahead."

Matsui nodded and set off on foot along the broad aisle in the middle.
Conn looked around in the dim light that filtered through the dusty
glass overhead. On either side of the central aisle were two
production lines; between each pair, at intervals, stood massive
machines which evidently fabricated parts for the power cartridges.
Over them, and over the machines directly involved in production,
were receptor aerials, all oriented toward a stubby tower, twenty
feet thick and fifty in height, topped by a hemispherical dome.

"That'll be the control tower for all the machinery in here," he
decided. "Anse, suppose you and I go take a look at it."

"We'll take a look at the machines," Rivas said. "Clyde, you and I can
work back on the right and then come down on the other side. You know
anything about this stuff?"

"Me? Nifflheim, no," Nichols said. "I know a robo-control when I see
one, and I know whether it's set to receive or not."

There was a self-powered lift inside the control tower. Conn and Anse
rode it to the top and got out, Anse snapping on his flashlight. It
was dark in the dome at the top; instead of windows there were
viewscreens all around it. Five men had worked here; at least, there
were four chairs at four intricate control panels, one for each of the
four production lines, and a fifth chair in front of a number of
communication screens. There was a heavy-duty power unit, turned off.
Conn threw the switch. Lights came on inside, and the outside
viewscreens lit.

They were examining the control-panels when Conn's belt radio buzzed.
He plugged it in on his helmet. It was Mohammed Matsui.

"There's one big power plant back here," the engineer said. "Right in
the middle. It only powers what's in front of it. There must be
another one in either wing, for the isotope plant and the
cartridge-case plant. I'll go look at them. But the power's been cut
off from the machines in the main building. There's four big switches,
one for each production line--"

He was interrupted by a shout, almost a shriek, from somewhere. It
sounded like Jerry Rivas. A moment later, Rivas was clamoring:

"Conn! What did you turn on? Turn it off, right away!"

Anse jumped to the switch, pulling it with one hand and getting on his
flashlight with the other. The lights went out and the screens went
dark.

"It's off."

"The dickens it is!" Rivas disputed. "There are a couple of big
supervisor-robots circling around, and a flock of workers...."

At the same time, Clyde Nichols began cursing. Or maybe he was
praying; it was hard to be certain.

"But we pulled the switch. It was only the lights and viewscreens in
here, anyhow."

"It didn't do any good. Pull another one."

Matsui, back at the power plant, was wanting to know what was wrong.
Captain Nichols stopped cursing--or praying?--and said, "Mutiny,
that's what! The robots have turned on us!"

He knew what had happened, or was almost sure he did. A radio impulse
had gone out, somehow, from the control tower. Something they hadn't
checked, that had been left on. There was just enough current-leakage
from the units in the robots to keep the receptors active for forty
years. The supervisor-robots had gone active, and they had activated
the rest. Once on, cutting the current from the control tower wouldn't
turn them off again.

"Put the switch in again, Anse; the damage is done and you won't make
it any worse."

When the screens came on, he looked around from one to another. The
two supervisors, big ovoid things like the small round ones they had
used in repairing the power reactors the first day, were circling
aimlessly near the roof, one clockwise and the other counterclockwise,
dodging obstructions and getting politely out of each other's way. At
lower altitude, a dozen assorted worker-robots were moving about, and
more were emerging from cells at the end of the building. Sweepers,
with rotary brooms and rakes, crablike all-purpose handling robots, a
couple of vacuum-cleaning robots, each with a flexible funnel-tipped
proboscis and a bulging dust-sack. One tiling, a sort of special job
designed to get into otherwise inaccessible places, had a twenty-foot,
many-jointed, claw-tipped arm in front. It passed by and slightly over
the tower, saw Clyde Nichols, and swooped toward him. With a howl,
Nichols dived under one of the large machines between two production
lines. A pistol went off a couple of times. That would be Jerry Rivas.
Nobody else bothered with a gun on Koshchei, but he carried one as
some people carry umbrellas, whether he expected to need it or not and
because he would feel lost without it.

That he took in at one glance. Then he was looking at the control
panels. The switches and buttons were all marked for machine-control
in different steps of power-unit production. That was all for the big
stuff, powered centrally. There weren't any controls for lifters or
conveyers or other mobile equipment. Evidently they were handled out
in the shop, from mobile control-vehicles. He did find, on the
communication-screen panel, a lot of things that had been left on. He
snapped them off, one after another, snapping them on when a screen
went dark. There were fifteen or twenty robots, some rather large, in
the air or moving on the floor by now.

"We can't do anything here," he told Anse. "These are the
shop-cleaning robots. They were the last things used here when the
place closed down, and the two supervisors were probably controlled
from a vehicle, and it's anybody's guess where that is now. When you
threw that switch, it sent out an impulse that activated them. They're
running their instruction-tapes, and putting the others through all
their tricks."

Three more shots went off. Jerry Rivas was shouting: "Hey, whattaya
know! I killed one of the buggers!"

There were any number of ways in which a work-robot could be shot out
of commission with a pistol. All of them would be by the purest of
pure luck. The next time we go into a place like this, Conn thought,
we take a couple of bazookas along.

"Turn everything off and let's go. See what we can do outside."

Anse put on his flashlight and pulled the switch. They got into the
lift and rode down, going outside. As soon as they emerged, they saw a
rectangular object fifteen feet long settle over their aircar, let
down half a dozen clawed arms, and pick it up, flying away with it. It
had taped instructions to remove anything that didn't belong in the
aisleway; it probably asked the supervisor about the aircar, and the
supervisor didn't return an inhibitory signal, so it went ahead. Conn
and Anse both shouted at it, knowing perfectly well that shouting was
futile. Then they were running for their lives with one of the
crablike all-purpose jobs after them. They dived under the slightly
raised bed of a long belt-conveyer and crawled. Jerry Rivas fired
another shot, somewhere.

The robots themselves were having troubles. They had done all the work
they were supposed to do; now the supervisors were insisting that they
do it over again. Uncomplainingly, they swept and raked and
vacuum-cleaned where they had vacuum-cleaned and raked and swept forty
years ago. The scrap-pickers, having picked all the scrap, were going
over the same places and finding nothing, and then getting deflected
and gathering a lot of things not definable as scrap, and then
circling around, darting away from one another in obedience to their
radar-operated evasion-systems, and trying to get to the outside scrap
pile, and finding that the doors wouldn't open because the door
openers weren't turned on, and finally dumping what they were carrying
when the supervisors gave them no instructions.

One of them seemed to have dumped something close to where Clyde
Nichols was hiding; if his language had been a little stronger, it
would have burned out Conn's radio. Their own immediate vicinity being
for the moment clear of flying robots, Conn and Anse rolled from under
the conveyer and legged it between the two production lines.
Immediately, three of the crablike all-purpose handling-robots saw
them, if that was the word for it, and came dashing for them, followed
by a thing that was mostly dump-lifter; it was banging its bin-lid up
and down angrily. About fifty yards ahead, Jerry Rivas stepped from
behind a machine and fired; one of the handling-robots flashed green
from underneath, went off contragravity, and came down with a crash.
Immediately, like wolves on a wounded companion, the other two pounced
upon it, dragging and pulling against each other. That was a hunk of
junk; their orders were to remove it.

The mobile trash-bin went zooming up to the ceiling, reversed within
twenty feet of it and came circling back to the ground, to go zooming
up again. It had gone crazy, literally. It had been getting too many
contradictory orders from its supervisor, and its circuits were
overloaded and its relays jammed. Rats in mazes and human-type people
in financial difficulties go psychotic in very much the same way.

The two surviving all-purpose robots were also headed for a padded
repair shop. They had come close enough to each other to activate
their anticollision safeties. Immediately, they flew apart. Then their
order to pick up that big piece of junk took over, and they started
forward again, to be bounced apart as soon as they were within five
feet of one another. If left alone, their power units would run down
in a year or so; until then, they would keep on trying.

Soulless intelligences, indeed! Then it occurred to him that for the
past however-long-it-had-been he hadn't heard from Mohammed Matsui. He
jiggled his radio.

"Ham, where are you? Are you still alive?"

"I'm back at the power plant," Matsui said exasperatedly. "There's a
big thing circling around here; every time I stick my head out, he
makes a dive at me. I didn't know robots would attack people."

"They don't. He just thinks you're some more trash he's been told to
gather up."

Matsui was indignant. Conn laughed.

"On the level, Ham. He has photoelectric vision, and a picture of what
that aisle is supposed to look like. When you get out in it, he knows
you don't belong there and tries to grab you."

"Hey, there's a lot of junk in here in a couple of baskets at the
converter. Say I chuck one out to him; what would he do?"

"Grab it and take it away, like he's taped to do."

"Okay; wait a minute."

They couldn't see the archway to the power plant, or even the robot
that had Matsui penned up, but after a few minutes they saw it soaring
away, clutching a big wire basket full of broken boxes and other
rubbish. It headed for the mutually repelling swarm of robots around
the door that wouldn't open for them. Conn and Anse and Jerry ran
toward the rear, joined by Clyde Nichols, who popped up from behind a
pile of spools of electric wire. They made it just before the
coffin-shaped thing that had carried off the aircar came over to
investigate.

"You want to be careful back there," Matsui told them, as they started
toward the temporary safety of the power plant. "All the
reactor-repair robots are there; don't get _them_ on the warpath
next."

Of course! There were always repair-robots at a power plant, to go
into places no human could enter and live. Behind the collapsium
shielding, they wouldn't have been activated.

"Let's have a look at them. What kind?"

"Standard reactor-servicers; the same we used at the administration
center."

Matsui opened the door, and they went into the power plant. Conn and
Matsui put on the service-power and activated the two supervisors;
they, in turn, activated their workers. It was tricky work getting
them all outside the collapsium-walled power-plant area; each worker
had to be passed through by the supervisor inside, under Matsui's
control. Because of the close quarters at which they worked inside the
reactor and the converter, they weren't fitted with anticollision
repulsors, and, working under close human supervision, they all had
audiovisual pickups. It took some time to get adequate screens set up
outside the collapsium.

Finally, they were ready. Their two supervisors went up to the
ceiling, one controlled by Conn and the other by Matsui. The larger,
egg-shaped shop-labor supervisors were still moving in irregular
orbits; those of the workers still able to receive commands were
trying to obey them, and the rest were jammed in a swarm at the other
end.

First one, and then the other of the labor-boss robots were captured.
They were by now at the end of what might, loosely, be called their
wits. They weren't used to operating without orders, and had been
sending out commands largely at random. Now they came to a stop, and
then began moving in tight, guided circles; one by one, the worker
robots still able to heed them were brought to ground and turned off.
That left the swarm at the door. The worker-robots under direct
control of the power-plant supervisors went after them, grappling them
and hauling them down to where Anse and Jerry Rivas and Captain
Nichols could turn them off manually.

The aircar was a hopeless wreck, but its radio was still functioning.
Conn called Charley Gatworth, who called a gang under Gomez, working
not far away; they came with another car.

It took all the next day for a gang of six of them to get the place
straightened up. Neither Conn nor Gomez, who was a roboticist himself,
would trust any of the workers or the two supervisors; their
experiences out of control had rendered them unreliable. They took out
their power units and left them to be torn down and repaired later.
Other robots were brought in to replace them. When they were through,
the power-unit cartridge plant was ready for operation.

Jerry Rivas wanted to start production immediately.

"We'll have to go back to Poictesme pretty soon," he said. "We don't
want to go back empty. Well, I know that no matter what we dug up, and
what we could sell or couldn't sell, there's always a market for
power-unit cartridges. Electric-light units, household-appliance
units, aircar and airboat units, any size at all. We run that plant at
full capacity for a few days and we can load the _Harriett Barne_
full, and I'll bet the whole cargo will be sold in a week after we get
in."




XV


The _Harriet Barne_ settled comfortably at the dock, the
bunting-swathed tugs lifting away from her. They had the outside sound
pickups turned as low as possible, and still the noise was deafening.
The spaceport was jammed, people on the ground and contragravity
vehicles swarming above, with police cars vainly trying to keep them
in order. All the bands in Storisende seemed to have been combined;
they were blaring the "Planetary Hymn";

_Genji Gartner's body lies a-moldering in the tomb,
But his soul goes marching on!_

When they opened the airlock, there was a hastily improvised
ceremonial barge, actually a farm-scow completely draped in red and
white, the Planetary colors. They all stopped, briefly, as they came
out, to enjoy the novelty of outdoor air which could actually be
breathed. Conn saw his father in the scow, and beside him Sylvie
Jacquemont, trying, almost successfully, to keep from jumping up and
down in excitement. Morgan Gatworth to meet his son, and Lester Dawes
to meet his. Kurt Fawzi, Dolf Kellton, Colonel Zareff, Tom Brangwyn.
He didn't see his mother, or his sister. Flora he had hardly counted
on, but he was disappointed that his mother wasn't there to meet him.

Sylvie was embracing her father as he shook hands with his; then she
threw her arms around his neck.

"Oh, Conn, I'm so happy! I was watching everything I could on-screen,
everything you saw, and all the places you were, and everything you
were doing...."

The scow--pardon, ceremonial barge--gave a slight lurch, throwing
them together. Over her shoulder, he saw his father and Yves
Jacquemont exchanging grins. Then they had to break it up while he
shook hands with Fawzi and Judge Ledue and the others, and by the time
that was over, the barge was letting down in front of the stand at the
end of the dock, and the band was still deafening Heaven with "Genji
Gartner's Body," and they all started up the stairs to be greeted by
Planetary President Vyckhoven; he looked like an elderly bear who has
been too well fed for too long in a zoo. And by Minister-General
Murchison, who represented the Terran Federation on Poictesme. He was
thin and balding, and he looked as though he had just mistaken the
vinegar cruet for the wine decanter. Genji Gartner's soul stopped
marching on, but the speeches started, and that was worse. And after
the speeches, there was the parade, everybody riding in
transparent-bodied aircars, and the _Lester Dawes_ and the two ships
of the new Planetary Air Navy and a swarm of gunboats in column five
hundred feet above, all firing salutes.

In spite of what wasn't, but might just as well have been, a concerted
conspiracy to keep them apart, he managed to get a few words privately
with Sylvie.

"My mother; she didn't get here. Is anything wrong?"

"Is anything anything else? I've been in the middle of it ever since
you went away. Your mother's still moaning about all these companies
your father's promoting--he never used to do anything like that, and
it's all too big, and it's going to end in a big smash. And then she
gets onto Merlin. You know, she won't say Merlin, she always calls it,
'that thing.'"

"I've noticed that."

"Then she begins talking about all the horrible things that'll happen
when it's found, and that sets Flora off. Flora says Merlin's a big
fake, and you and your father are using it to rob thousands of widows
and orphans of their life savings, and that sets your mother off
again. Self-sustaining cyclic reaction, like the Bethe solar-phoenix.
And every time I try to pour a little oil on the troubled waters, I
find I've gotten it on the fire instead. And then, Flora had this
fight with Wade Lucas, and of course, she blames you for that."

"Good heavens, why?"

"Well, she couldn't blame it on herself, could she? Oh, you mean why
the fight? Lucas is in business with your father now, and she can't
convince him that you and your father are a pair of quadruple-dyed
villains, I suppose. Anyhow, the engagement is _phttt_! Conn, is my
father going back to Koshchei?"

"As soon as we can round up some people to help us on the ship."

"Then I'm going along. I've had it, Conn. I'm a combat-fatigue case."

"But, Sylvie; that isn't any place for a girl."

"Oh, poo! This is Sylvie. We're old war buddies. We soldiered together
on Barathrum; remember?"

"Well, you'd be the only girl, and...."

"That's what you think. If you expect to get any kind of a gang
together, at least a third of them will be girls. A lot of technicians
are girls, and when work gets slack, they're always the first ones to
get shoved out of jobs. I'll bet there are a thousand girl technicians
out of work here--any line of work you want to name. I know what I'll
do; I'll make a telecast appearance. I still have some news value,
from the Barathrum business. Want to bet that I won't be the working
girl's Joan of Arc by this time next week?"

That cheered him. A girl can punch any kind of a button a man can, and
a lot of them knew what buttons to punch, and why. Say she could find
fifty girls....

He had a slightly better chance to talk to his father before the
banquet at the Executive Palace that evening. They shared the same
suite at the Ritz-Gartner, and even welcoming committees seldom chase
their victims from bedroom to bath.

"Yes, I know all about it," Rodney Maxwell said bitterly. "I was home,
a couple of weeks ago. Flora simply will not speak to me, and your
mother begged me, in tears, to quit everything we're doing here. I
tried to give her some idea of what would happen if I dropped this,
even supposing I could; she wouldn't listen to me." He finished
putting the studs in his shirt. "You still think this is worth what
it's costing us?"

"You saw the views we sent back. There's work on Koshchei for a
million people, at least. Why, even these two makeshift ships they're
putting together here at Storisende are giving work, one way or
another, to almost a thousand. Think what things will be like a year
from now, if this keeps on."

Rodney Maxwell gave a wry laugh. "Didn't know I had a real Simon-pure
altruist for a son."

"Pardner, when you call me that, smile."

"I am smiling. With some slight difficulty."

He didn't think well of the banquet. Back in Litchfield, Senta would
have fired half her human help and taken a sledgehammer to her
robo-chef for a meal like that. Even his father's camp cook would have
been ashamed of it. And there were more speeches.

President Vyckhoven managed to get hold of him and Yves Jacquemont
afterward, and steered them into his private study.

"Have you any real reason for thinking that Merlin might be on
Koshchei?" the Planetary President asked.

"Great Ghu, no! We weren't looking for Merlin, Mr. President. We were
looking for a hypership. We have one, too. Calling her _Ouroboros II_.
Twenty-five-hundred-footer. We expect to have her to space in a few
months. I surely don't need to tell you what that will do toward
restoring planetary prosperity."

"No, of course not; a hypership of our own. But...." He looked from
one to the other of them. "But I understood.... That is, Mr. Kurt
Fawzi was saying...."

"Mr. Fawzi is looking for Merlin here on Poictesme. If anybody finds
it, that's where it'll be found. I'm interested in getting business
started again. If Merlin is found, it would help, of course." He
shrugged.

"Don't look at me," Jacquemont said. "Mr. Maxwell--both of them,
father and son--want some spaceships. They hired me to help build
them. That's all I have in it." Then he relit the cigar the President
had given him and leaned back in his chair, staring at the stuffed
alcesoid head with the seven-foot hornspread above the fireplace.

Conn described the interview to his father after they were back at the
hotel.

"I hope you convinced him. You know, he's afraid of Merlin. A lot of
people have been saying that if Merlin's found, it should be used to
determine Government policy. A few extremists are beginning to say
that Merlin ought to _be_ the Government, and Jake Vyckhoven and his
cronies ought to be dumped. Into the handiest mass-energy converter,
preferably. You know, if anybody found Merlin and started it auditing
the Planetary Treasury, Jake Vyckhoven'd be the one who'd be wanting a
hypership."

Tom Brangwyn ran him down the next morning in the dining room.

"Conn, I wish you'd come along with me," he said. "Some of us are up
in Kurt's suite; we'd all like to talk to you."

Somehow, he was acting as though he were making an arrest. That might
have been nothing but professional habit. Conn went up to Fawzi's
suite, and found Fawzi and Judge Ledue and Dolf Kellton and close to a
dozen others there.

"I'm glad you could come, Conn," the Judge greeted him. Now that the
defendant had arrived, the trial could begin. "I wish your father
could have gotten here. I asked him to come, but he had a prior
engagement. A meeting with some of the financial people here, about
some company he's interested in."

"That's right; Trisystem & Interstellar Spacelines."

"Interstellar!" Kurt Fawzi almost howled. "Great Ghu! Now it isn't
enough to go out to Koshchei; he wants to go clear out of the
Trisystem. That's what we wanted to talk about; all this nonsense you
and your father are in. Merlin's right here on Poictesme. It's right
at Force Command, and if your father hadn't robbed us of all our best
men, like Jerry Rivas and Anse Dawes, we'd have found it by now. I
don't think you and your father care a hoot if we ever find Merlin or
not!"

"Kurt, that's a dreadful thing to say," Dolf Kellton objected in a
shocked voice.

"It's a dreadful thing to have to say," Fawzi replied, "but you tell
me what Conn Maxwell or Rodney Maxwell are doing to help find it."

"Who showed you where Force Command was?" Klem Zareff asked.

Nobody could think of any good quick comeback to that.

Conn took advantage of the pause to ask, "Why do you want to find
Merlin?"

"Why do we ..." Fawzi spluttered indignantly. "If you don't know...."

"I know why I do. I want to see if you do. Do you?"

"Merlin would answer so many questions," Dolf Kellton told him gently.
"Questions I can't answer for myself."

"With Merlin, we could set up a legal code and a system of
jurisprudence that would give everybody absolute justice," Judge Ledue
said.

As if absolute justice wasn't the last thing anybody in his right
senses would want; a robot-judge would have the whole planet in jail
inside a month.

"We have a man who joined us after you went off to Koshchei, Conn,"
Franz Veltrin said. "A Mr. Carl Leibert. He's some kind of a
clergyman, from over Morven way. He says that Merlin could formulate
an entirely new religion, which would regenerate humanity."

"Well, I don't have any such lofty ideas," Fawzi said. "I just want
Merlin to show us how to get some prosperity here; bring things back
to what they were before Poictesme went broke."

"And that's what Father and I are trying to do. You're going into the
woods with a book on how to chop down a tree, and no ax." Fawzi looked
at him in surprise, started to say something, and thought better of
it. "If we want prosperity, we need tools. Our problem is loss of
markets. If we find Merlin, and tape it with everything that's
happened in the forty years since it was shut down, Merlin will tell
us where to find new markets. But the markets won't come to us. We'll
have to do our own exporting, and we'll need ships. Now, you men have
been studying about Merlin, and hunting for Merlin, all your lives. I
can't add anything to what you know, and neither can my father. You
find Merlin, and we'll have the ships ready when you do find it."

"Kurt, I think he has a point," somebody said.

"You're blasted well right he has," Klem Zareff put in. "If it wasn't
for Conn Maxwell, you know where we'd be? Back in Litchfield, sitting
around in Kurt's office, talking about how wonderful things'll be when
we find Merlin, and doing nothing to find it."

"Kurt, I believe Conn is entitled to an apology," Judge Ledue ruled.
"How close we are to finding Merlin I don't know, but it is due to him
that we have any hope of finding it at all."

"Conn, I'm sorry," Fawzi said. "I oughtn't to have said some of the
things I did. But we're all on edge; we've been having so much
trouble.... Conn, it's right there at Force Command; I know it is.
We've been all over the place. We have shafts sunk at each of the
corners; we've used scanners, and put off echo shots. Nothing. We
looked for additional passages out of the headquarters; there aren't
any. But it has to be somewhere around. It just _has_ to be!"

"Maybe if I go out to Force Command with you, I might see something
you've overlooked. And if I can't, I'll try to scrape up some stuff on
Koshchei for you. Deep-vein scanners, that sort of thing, from the
mines."

They took the _Lester Dawes_ out at a little past noon and turned
south and east. Everybody aboard was happy--except Conn Maxwell. He
was thinking of the years and years ahead of these trusting, hopeful
old men, each year the grave of another expectation. Two hundred miles
from Force Command, the _Goblin_ met them, her sides still spalled and
dented from the hits she had taken in Barathrum Spaceport. When they
came in sight of it, the mesa-top was deserted. Fawzi began wondering
where in Nifflheim all the drilling rigs, and the seismo-trucks, were.
Somebody with a pair of binoculars called attention to activity on the
side of the high butte on top of which the relay station was located.
Fawzi began swearing exasperatedly.

"Might be something Mr. Leibert thought of," Franz Veltrin suggested.

"Then why in blazes didn't he screen us about it?"

"Who is this Leibert?" Conn asked. "Somebody mentioned him this
morning, I think."

"He joined us after you left, Conn," Dolf Kellton said. "He's a
clergyman from Morven. No regular denomination; he has a sect of his
own."

"Yah, he would!" Klem Zareff rumbled. "Pious fraud!"

"He's really a good man, Conn; Klem's prejudiced. He says we ought to
use Merlin to show us the true nature of God, and how to live in
accordance with the Divine Will. He says Merlin can teach us a new
religion."

A new religion, based on Merlin; that would be good. And then the
fanatics who thought Merlin was the Devil would start a holy war to
wipe out the servants of Satan, and with all the combat equipment that
was lying around on this planet.... For the first time since this
business started, he began to feel really frightened.

An aircar came bulleting away from the butte and landed on the mesa as
the _Lester Dawes_ set down. The man who met them at the head of the
vertical shaft wore Federation fatigues--baggy trousers, ankle boots
and long smock, dyed black. He was bareheaded, and his white hair was
almost shoulder-long. He had a white beard.

"Welcome, Brothers," he greeted, a hand raised in benediction. "And
who is this with you?"

His voice was high and quavery; not a good pulpit voice, Conn thought.

Kurt Fawzi introduced Conn, and Leibert grasped his hand with a grip
that was considerably stronger than his voice.

"Bless you, young man! It is to you alone that we owe our thanks that
we are about to find the Great Computer. Every sapient being in the
Galaxy will honor your name for a thousand years."

"Well, I hadn't counted on quite that much, Mr. Leibert. If it'll only
help a few of these people to make a decent living I'll be satisfied."

Leibert shook his head sadly. "You think entirely in material terms,
young man," he reproved. "Forget these things; acquire the higher
spiritual values. The Great Computer must not be degraded to such
uses; we should let it show us how to lift ourselves to a high
spiritual plane...."

It went on like that, after they went down to Foxx Travis's--now
Fawzi's--office, where there were silver-stoppered decanters instead
of the old green-glass pitcher, and gold-plated ashtrays, and thick
carpets on the floor. The man was a lunatic; he made Fawzi's office
gang look frigidly sane. Furthermore, he was an ignoramus. He had no
idea what a computer could or couldn't do. Anybody who could build a
computer of the sort he thought Merlin was wouldn't need it, he
_would_ be God.

As he talked, Conn began to be nagged by an odd sense of recognition.
He'd seen this Carl Leibert before, somewhere, and somehow he was sure
that the long white hair and the untrimmed beard weren't part of the
picture. That puzzled him. He doubted if he'd have remembered Leibert
from six years ago, almost seven, now, though a lot of itinerant
evangelists showed up in Litchfield. That might have been it.

"I tell you, the Great Computer is there, in the heart of the butte,"
Leibert was insisting, now. "It has been revealed to me in a dream. It
is completely buried. After it was made, no human touched it. The men
who were here and used it in the War communicated with it only by
radio."

That could be so. There were fully robotic computers, intended for use
in places where no human could go and live. There was a big one on
Nifflheim, armored against the fluorine atmosphere and the
hydrofluoric-acid rains. But there was no point in that here, the
things were enormously complicated, and military engineering of any
sort emphasized simplicity--_Aaaagh!_ Was he beginning to believe this
balderdash himself?

Klem Zareff fell in with him as they were going to dinner. "Revealed
in a dream!" the old Rebel snorted. "One thing you can always get
away with lying about is what you dream."

"You think he's lying? I think he's just crazy."

"That's what he wants you to think. Look, Conn, he knows Merlin is
here; he's trying to keep us from it. That's why he shifted all that
equipment over on the butte. He's working for Sam Murchison."

"I thought your theory was that the Federation had lost Merlin."

"It was, at first. It doesn't look that way to me now. It's right here
at Force Command, somewhere. They don't want it found, and they're
going to do everything they can to stop us. I oughtn't to have left
this fellow Leibert here alone; well, I won't do that again. Get Tom
Brangwyn to help me."




XVI


The voyage back to Koshchei had been a week-long nightmare. When she
had been the pride and budget-wrecker of Transcontinent & Overseas
Airline, the _Harriet Barne_ had accommodated two hundred first-class
and five hundred lower-deck passengers, but the conversion to a
spaceship had drastically reduced her capacity. The three hundred men
and women who had been recruited for the Koshchei colony had been
crammed into her with brutal disregard for comfort, privacy or
anything else except the ability of the air-recyclers to keep them
breathing. When Captain Nichols set her down at the administration
building at Port Carpenter, a few had had to be carried off, but they
were all alive, which made the trip an unqualified success.

The dozen leaders of the expedition were congratulating themselves on
that in one of the executive offices after the first dinner at Port
Carpenter. Rodney Maxwell, in Storisende, had joined them in
screen-image; he was mostly listening, and sometimes contributing a
remark apropos of something the rest of them had said five minutes
ago.

"Our hypership," Conn was saying, "is going to have to be item
two on the agenda. The first thing we need is a ship for the
Poictesme-Koshchei run. By this time next year, we ought to have a
thousand to fifteen hundred people here at the least. We can't haul
them all on that flying sardine can."

"We'll need supplies, too. What was left here won't last forever,"
Nichols added.

"And you're going to have to run this at a profit," Luther Chen-Wong,
who had come along for first hand experience and to help with
administrative work, added. "You have a big payroll to meet, and
you'll have to keep the stockholders happy. People like Jethro
Sastraman and some of these Storisende bankers aren't going to be
satisfied with promises and long-term prospects; they'll want
dividends."

"We'll have to get claims staked on something besides Port Carpenter,
too. Those ships that are building at Storisende will be finished
before long," Jerry Rivas said. "If we don't get some more things
claimed, the first thing you know, we'll own Port Carpenter and
nothing else."

"Well, let's see what we can find in the way of a big airboat, or a
small ship," Conn said. "Jerry, you can pick a party for exploring.
Just zigzag around the planet and transmit in locations and views of
whatever you find, and we'll send it on to Storisende."

"And don't pick anybody for your exploring party that can't be spared
from anything here," Jacquemont added. "We don't want to have to chase
you halfway around the world to bring back the only specialist in
something yesterday at the latest."

"Are you going to come along, Conn?" Rivas asked.

"Oh, Lord, no! I'm going to be doing fifteen things at once here."

All the computer work. Finding materials to make astrogational
equipment and robo-pilots. Studying hyperspace theory--fortunately,
there was an excellent library here--and setting up classes, and
teaching school. And keeping in touch with his father, on Poictesme.
It was making him nervous not to know what sort of foolishness the
older and wiser heads might be getting into.

The next morning, they began organizing work-gangs and setting up
committees. Three men, two girls and about twenty robots got an
open-pit iron mine started; as soon as the steel mill was ready, ore
started coming in. Anse Dawes had a gang looking for something they
could build a 350-foot interplanetary ship out of; Jacquemont and Mack
Vibart were getting plans and specifications and making lists of
needed materials. Conn gathered a dozen men and women and started
classes in computer theory and practice; at the same time, he and
Charley Gatworth were teaching themselves and each other hyperspatial
astrogation, which was the art of tossing a ship into some
everythingless noplace outside normal space-time, and then pulling her
out again by her bootstraps at some other place in the normal
continuum, light-years away.

Roughly, it compared to shooting hummingbirds on the wing,
blindfolded, with a not particularly accurate pistol, from a
mile-a-minute merry-go-round.

That was something you could only do with a computer. A human, with a
slide rule, a pencil and pad, could figure it out, of course--if he
had fifty-odd thousand years to do it. A good computer did it in
thirty seconds. That was one difference between people and computers.
The other difference was that the desirability of making a hyperspace
jump would never occur to a computer, unless somebody pushed a button
and taped in instructions.

They found a three-hundred-foot globular skeleton, probably the
nucleus of a big hyperspace ship, and decided that was big enough for
what they wanted. The entire colony got to work on it. Photoprinted
plans and specifications poured out as Jacquemont and a couple of
draftsmen got them up. Steel came out of the steel mill at one end
while ore came in at the other. A swarm of big contragravity machines,
some robotic and some human-operated, clustered around the skeletal
hull like hornets building a nest.

Trisystem & Interstellar Spacelines was chartered; the lawyers
reported having to overcome a little more resistance than usual from
the Government about that. And the bill to nationalize Merlin, which
had died in committee, was resuscitated and was being debated hotly on
the floor of Parliament. The Administration was now supporting it.

"Are they completely crazy?" Conn wanted to know, when he heard about
that. "They pass that bill and nobody's going to look for Merlin if
they know the Government will snatch it as soon as they find it."

"That is precisely Jake Vyckhoven's idea," his father replied. "I told
you he was afraid of Merlin. He's getting more afraid of it every
day."

He had reason to. There was a growing sentiment in favor of turning
the entire Government over to the computer as soon as it was found. To
his horror, Conn heard himself named as chairman of a committee that
should be set up to operate it. The moderates, who had merely wanted
Merlin used in an advisory capacity, were dropping out; the agitation
was coming from extremists who wanted Merlin to be the whole
Government, and now the extremists were developing an extreme wing of
their own, who called themselves Cybernarchists and started wearing
colored-shirt uniforms and greeting each other with an archaic
stiff-arm salute, and the words, "Hail Merlin!"

And the followers of the gospel-shouter on the west coast were now
cropping up all over the mainland, and on the continent of Acaire to
the north, and another cult, non-religious, was convinced that Merlin
was a living machine, with conscious intelligence of its own and
awesome psi-powers, a sort of super-Golem, which, if found and
awakened, would enslave the whole Galaxy. Fortunately, these two hated
each other as venomously as both did the Cybernarchists, and spent
most of their energies attacking each other's meetings. The
news-services were beginning to publish casualty lists, some heavy
enough for outpost fighting between a couple of regular armies.

One thing, it helped the employment situation. Everybody was hiring
mercenaries.

"But what," Conn asked, "are the sane people doing?"

"You ought to know," his father told him. "I suspect that you have all
of them on Koshchei now."

The sane people, if that was what they were, were being busy. They
were putting a set of Abbott lift-and-drive engines together, and
Conn's computer class was estimating the mass of the finished ship and
the amount of energy needed to overcome gravitation and give it
constant acceleration from Koshchei to Poictesme. They were learning,
by trial and error, largely error, how to build a set of pseudograv
engines. And they were putting together a hundred and one other
things, all of which was good training for the time they'd be ready to
start work on _Ouroboros II_.

Jerry Rivas had found a contragravity craft which seemed to have been
used by some top official for business and inspection trips, had
gathered a crew of non-specialists who weren't urgently needed at Port
Carpenter, and set out to circumnavigate the planet. It worked just
the reverse of expectation. He found a big uranium mine, with an
isotope-separation plant and a battery of plutonium-breeders; that
meant that Mohammed Matsui and half a dozen other nuclear-power people
had to get into another boat and speed after him to see what he had
really found. As soon as they landed, Rivas took off again to discover
a copper mine and a complex of smelters and processing plants. That
took a few more experts, or reasonable facsimiles, away from Port
Carpenter. And then he found a whole city that manufactured nothing
but computers and robo-controls and things like that.

Conn loaded his whole computer-theory class onto a freight-scow and
took them there. By the time he landed, his father was screening him
from Storisende.

"When are you going to get the ship finished?" he was asking. "Kurt
Fawzi's pestering the daylights out of me. He wants that equipment you
promised him."

"We're working on it. What's happened, has Carl Leibert had another
revelation?"

"I don't know about that. Kurt's sure Merlin is directly under Force
Command. And speaking about Leibert, Klem Zareff's been after me about
him. You know I've contracted for the full-time and exclusive services
of this Barton-Massarra detective agency. Well, Klem wants me to put
them to work investigating Leibert."

"Yes, I know; Leibert's a Terran Federation spy. Why do you need the
full-time services of the biggest private detective agency on
Poictesme?"

"There have been some odd things happening. People have been trying to
bribe and intimidate some of my office help. I have found microphones
and screen-pickups planted around. I caught one of our clerks trying
to make copies of voice-tapes. I think it's some of these other
Merlin-chasing companies, trying to find out how close we are to it.
Klem Zareff is recruiting more guards. But how soon are you going to
get that ship built?"

"We're working on it. That's all I know, now."

He went back to work getting a classroom ready for his students. If
he'd accepted that instructorship at Montevideo, he wouldn't be a full
professor now, but none of the rest of this would be happening,
either.

That night, he had the dream about starting the big machine and not
being able to stop it again.

There was street-fighting in Storisende between the Cybernarchists and
Government troops. There was a pitched battle in the west between the
Armageddonists (Merlin-is-Satan) and the Human Supremacy League
(Merlin-is-the-Golem), with heavy losses and claims of victory on both
sides. President Vyckhoven proclaimed planet-wide martial law, and
then discovered that he had nothing to enforce it with.

Luther Chen-Wong screened him from Port Carpenter. His voice was
almost inaudibly low at first.

"Conn, I just had a call from Jerry and Clyde. I think we can knock
off work on that ship we're building now. We won't need it."

"Have they found a ship?" If they had, it would be the first one
anybody had found. "Where?"

"They haven't found _a_ ship, Conn; they've found all of them. All the
ships in the Alpha System except the _Harriet Barne_ and the two
they're building at Storisende. The place is marked on the map as
Sickle Mountain Naval Observatory. It's just a bitty little dot, but
the map was made before the evacuation started. It's where most of the
troops in the system were embarked on hyperships, I think. Wait till I
show you the views."

Conn put on another screen; the first view was from an altitude of
five miles. He didn't need Luther's voice to identify Sickle Mountain;
a long curve, with a spur at right angles to one end, the name must
have suggested itself to whoever saw it first. The observatory had
been built where the handle of the sickle joined the blade; as the
ship from which the view had been taken had approached, the details
grew plainer. At the same time, it became evident that the plain
inside the curve of the sickle was powdered with tiny sparkles, like
tinsel dust on red-brown velvet.

"Great Ghu, are those all ships?"

"That's right. Look at this one, now."

The view changed. The aircraft was down, now, below the crest of the
mountain, circling slowly above the plain. Hundreds, no, over a
thousand, of them; two- and three-and five-hundred-footers, and here
and there a thousand-footer that could have been converted into a
hypership if anybody had wanted to take the trouble. The view changed
again; this time from an aircar dropped from the ship, he supposed; it
was down almost to the tops of the ships, and he could read names and
home ports: _Pixie_, Chloris; _Helen O'Loy_, Anaitis. They were from
Jurgen. _Sky-Rover_, Port Saunders; she was from Horvendile. Ships
from Storisende, and Yellowmarsh on Janicot, and....

"Now we know where they all went."

It was logical, of course. Most of the hyperships used in the
evacuation had been built here. It had been less trouble to lead the
troops and the civilian workers from Poictesme and the other planets
onto small normal-space ships and bring them here than to take the big
ships away on short interplanetary runs to the other planets.

"Have you screened my father yet?"

"Yes. This is going to knock the bottom out of the companies that are
building those ships at Storisende, I'm afraid."

"Their tough luck."

"It could be everybody's tough luck. Both those companies have been
issuing stock, and there's been a lot of speculation in it. This
market's so inflated now that a puncture at one place might blow the
whole thing out."

He knew that. He shrugged. "Father will have to think of something.
Tell him I'll screen him from Sickle Mountain."

Then he went back to his classroom.

"All right, class dismissed," he said. "You have twenty minutes to get
your bags packed. We're going to work for real, now."

Airboats and airships flocked to Sickle Mountain; some of them
hastened back to Port Carpenter for loads of food, for there was none
in the storehouses at the embarkation camp. They inspected ship after
ship, and chose two three-hundred-footers. They sent airships and
freight-scows to the dozen-odd cities and industrial centers that had
been already explored, to gather cargo, as far as possible the items
in shortest supply on Poictesme.

"Don't worry about a market smash," his father told him. "We have that
taken care of. Trisystem Investments has just bought up a lot of stock
in both of those companies, and we've set up agreements with
them--informally, of course; we'll have to get them voted on by our
own companies--to sell them ships from Koshchei. In return, the
company that's building the ship out of four air-freighters will go to
Janicot, and the company that's building a ship out of the old
Leitzenring Building will go to Jurgen, and they'll both stay off
Koshchei. Sterber, Flynn & Chen-Wong will probably be defending
antitrust suits till the end of time. The Planetary Government has
stopped liking us, you know."

"Then we'll have to get one that will like us. There'll be an election
about this time next year, won't there?"

His father nodded. "To use one of your expressions, we're working on
it. How soon can you get your ships in?"

"Well be loaded and ready to lift off in a week. Another week for the
trip."

"Well, don't forget that equipment you promised Kurt Fawzi."

"We'll have that on. Jerry Rivas is gathering it up now."

"How are you fixed for arms on Koshchei?"

"Arms? Why, there are some. There was a pretty big force of Space
Marines on duty here, and they left everything they couldn't carry in
their hands. Why? The Armageddonists and the Cybernarchists and Human
Supremacy bought all you had on hand?"

"They're buying, but I wasn't thinking of that. I was thinking that
your crews might need something to argue their way off the ships at
Storisende with. Things are getting just slightly rugged here, now."




XVII


There were no bands or speeches when they came in this time. A lot of
contragravity vehicles circled widely around the spaceport, but except
for a few news-service cars, the police were keeping them back of a
two-mile radius around the landing-pits. A couple of gunboats were
making tight circles above, and on the dock were more vehicles and a
horde of police and guards.

When Rodney Maxwell came across the bridge from the dock after they
opened the airlocks, he was followed by a dozen Barton-Massarra
private police, as villainous-looking a collection of ruffians as Conn
had ever seen. He was wearing a new suit, with a waist-length jacket
instead of the long coat he usually wore, and there was a holstered
automatic on each hip. In Litchfield, he never carried more than one
pistol, and Storisende was supposed to be an orderly place where
nobody needed to go armed. More than anything else, that told Conn
approximately what had been going on while he had been on Koshchei.

"Ship-guard," his father told Yves Jacquemont. "All your crew can come
off; they'll take care of things. Get your people in that troop
carrier over there. Everybody will stay at Interplanetary Building.
None of the hotels are safe, not even the Ritz-Gartner. And be sure
everybody's well armed when they come off the ship."

Jacquemont nodded. "I know the drill; I've been in Port Oberth on
Venus and Skorvann on Loki. Any law we want, we make for ourselves."

"That's about it. I'll see you there. Conn, I wish you'd come with me.
Somebody here wants to talk to you."

He wondered if his mother, or Flora, had come to Storisende. When he
asked his father as they crossed onto the dock, there was a brief
twinge of pain in Rodney Maxwell's face.

"No, they're not having anything to do--_Duck; quick!_"

Then his father was diving under a lifter-truck that stood empty on
the dock. The private police were scattering for cover, and an
auto-cannon began pom-pomming. Conn took one quick look in the
direction in which it was firing, saw an aircar that had broken
through the police line and was rushing toward them, and dived under
the lifter after his father. As he did, he saw a missile flash out
from one of the gunboats like a thrown knife. Then he huddled beside
his father and put his arms over his head.

He felt the heat and shock of the explosion and, an instant later,
heard the roar. When nothing immediately disastrous happened after he
had counted fifteen seconds, he stuck his head out and looked up. The
gunboat was struggling to regain her equilibrium, and the aircar had
vanished in a fireball. They both emerged, straightening. His father
was brushing himself with his hands and saying something about always
having to duck under something when he had a new suit on.

"Robot control, probably; could have been launched from anywhere in
town. Why, no; your mother and Flora aren't speaking to either of us,
any more. Pity, of course, but I'm glad they're in Litchfield. It's a
little healthier there."

They walked to the slim recon-car and climbed in, pulling the door
shut after them. Wade Lucas was waiting for them at the controls.

"There, you see!" he began, as soon as he had the car lifting. "What
I've been telling you. We'll have to stop this."

"Conn, meet our new partner. I told him everything you told me, out on
the Mall, the day you came home. I had to," his father hastened to
add. "He'd figured most of it out for himself. The only thing to do
was admit him to the lodge and give him the oath."

"I didn't know about General Travis; I didn't even know he was still
alive," Lucas said. "But the rest of it was pretty obvious, once I
stopped jumping to conclusions and did a little thinking. You know,
ever since I came here I've been preaching to these people to stop
looking for Merlin and do something to help themselves. You're smarter
than I am, Conn; instead of opposing them, you're guiding them."

"Did you tell Flora?"

Lucas shook his head. "I tried to explain what you're trying to do,
but she wouldn't listen. She just told me I'd gotten to be as big a
crook as you two." He had the car up to fifty thousand; putting it
into a wide circle around the city, he locked the controls and got out
his cigarettes. "Rod, we've got to stop this. You were just lucky this
time. Some of these days your luck's going to run out."

"How can we stop?" Conn demanded. "Tell them the truth? They'd lynch
us, and then go on hunting for Merlin."

"Worse than that; it'd be a smash worse than the one when the War
ended. I was only ten then, but I can remember that very plainly. We
can't stop it, and we wouldn't dare stop it if we could."

"What's been going on here in the last month?" Conn asked. "I've been
too busy to keep in touch. I know there's been rioting, and these
crackpot sects, but...."

"I think this is personal to us. There have been some ugly things
happening. There were four attempts to burglarize our offices. I told
you about some of the other stuff, the microphones we found, and so
on. The worst thing was Lucy Nocero, my secretary. She just vanished,
a couple of weeks ago. Three days later, the police found her
wandering in a park, a complete imbecile. Somebody who either didn't
know how to use one or didn't care what happened had used a mind-probe
on her. It's twenty to one she'll never recover."

"It's this Storisende financial crowd," Wade Lucas said. "They had
things all their own way till Alpha-Interplanetary was organized. Now
they're getting shoved into the background, and they don't like it."

"They're making more money than they ever did, and they just love it,"
Rodney Maxwell said. "I'd think it was either Jake Vyckhoven or Sam
Murchison."

"Murchison!" Lucas hooted. "Why, he's nobody! Federation
Minister-General; all the authority of the Terran Federation, and
nothing to enforce it with. He doesn't have a position, here; he has a
disease. Sleeping sickness."

"He certainly doesn't believe there is a Merlin, does he?" Conn asked.

"I don't know what he believes, but he's getting to be Klem Zareff's
opposite number. He thinks this whole thing's a plot against the
Federation. It's a good thing Klem didn't get around to repainting his
combat vehicles black and green, the way he did the Home Guard stuff
at Litchfield."

"I'd be more likely to think it was Vyckhoven."

"Could be. Or it could be the Armageddonists, or Human Supremacy; I am
ashamed to say that this heil-Merlin Cybernarchist gang are friendly
to us. Or it could be some of the banking crowd, or some of these
rival space-companies. Barton-Massarra is trying to find out. Well, we
have some of Wade's pet suspects at Interplanetary Building now.
There's been a meeting going for the last week to partition the Alpha
Gartner System."

The Interplanetary Building had been a medium-class residence hotel at
the time of the War. Junior staff officers and civilian technicians
and their families had lived there. It had been vacant ever since the
disastrous outbreak of peace. Now it had a big new fluorolite sign,
and housed the offices of all the Maxwell companies. There was a
truculent display of anti-vehicle weapons on the top landing stage,
and more Barton-Massarra private police. They looked even more
villainous then the ones at the spaceport. Conn recalled having heard
that most of the Blackie Perales gang had been discharged for lack of
evidence; he wondered how many of them had hired with Barton-Massarra.

The meeting was in a big conference room six floors down; it had been
going on uninterrupted for days, with all the interested companies'
representatives standing watch-and-watch around the clock. Lester
Dawes and Morgan Gatworth and Lorenzo Menardes were there for L. E. &
S.; Transcontinent & Overseas was represented; there were people from
Alpha-Interplanetary, and bankers and financiers, and people from the
companies building the two ships at the spaceport. And J. Fitzwilliam
Sterber, the lawyer.

And reporters, phoning stories in and getting audiovisual interviews
of anybody who would hold still long enough. They converged in a rush
as Conn and his father and Lucas came in.

"No statement, gentlemen!" Rodney Maxwell shouted, above the babble of
their questions. "When we have anything to release, it will be
released to all of you."

Jacquemont and Nichols had already arrived; Lucas went to them and
began talking about stevedores and lifters to get off the cargoes from
the ships. Conn hastened to join them.

"The scanning and mining equipment aboard the _Helen O'Loy_," he said.
"That shouldn't be unloaded here; we'll take the ship out to Force
Command and unload it there."

Out of the corner of his eye, he saw, a lurking reporter snatch the
handphone off his radio and begin talking; it would be stated
authoritatively that Merlin was at Force Command and would be
uncovered as soon as special equipment from Koshchei arrived.

Everybody at the long table was shouting at everybody else. The Jurgen
and Janicot Companies wanted to buy ships from Koshchei Exploitation &
Development. The Alpha-Interplanetary director, who was also a
vice-president of Transcontinent & Overseas, opposed that; another
director of A-I, who was also board chairman of Koshchei Exploitation
& Development, wanted to sell ships to anybody who had the price, the
Transcontinent & Overseas man was calling him a traitor to the
company, and one of the stockbrokers, who was also a vice-president of
Trisystem Investments and a director of Trisystem & Interstellar
Spacelines, was wanting to know which company. And a banker who was
stockholder in all the companies was shouting that they were all a
gang of crooks, and J. Fitzwilliam Sterber was declaring that anybody
who called him a crook could continue the discussion through seconds.

Conn suddenly realized that dueling had never been illegal on
Poictesme. He wondered how many duels this meeting was going to hatch.

The next afternoon the _Helen O'Loy_ was unloaded, all but the mining
equipment; Conn and Yves Jacquemont and Charley Gatworth and a few
others took her out to Force Command. They were met by Klem Zareff's
armed airboats two hundred and fifty miles from the mesa, and they
found the place in more of a state of siege than when the Badlands had
been full of outlaws. A lot of heavy armament seemed to have been
moved in from Barathrum Spaceport, and Zareff had more men and
firepower than he had ever commanded during the System States War. If
Minister-General Murchison was convinced that the Merlin excitement
was a cover for some seditious plot against the Federation, this ought
to give him food for thought.

There was still work, mostly boring lateral shafts for echo shots,
going on at the butte, under the relay station. That was Leibert, who
was still insisting that that was where Merlin was buried. There was
also some work on top of the mesa, by those who were convinced that
that was where Merlin was to be found. Kurt Fawzi was taking the lead
in that. Franz Veltrin and Dolf Kellton sided with Leibert, and
Fawzi's office clique had split into two factions. Judge Ledue was
maintaining strict impartiality, as befitted his judicial position.

"Why hasn't your father gotten those detectives of his to work on this
fake preacher?" Zareff wanted to know, when he and Tom Brangwyn were
able to talk to Conn alone.

"Well, they've been busy," Conn said. "Trying to keep him alive, for
one thing. You heard about the robo-bomb somebody launched at us the
day we brought the ships in, didn't you?"

"Yes, and we heard about the Nocero girl, too," Brangwyn said. "But
hasn't it ever occurred to you or your dad that this fellow that calls
himself Leibert might be mixed up with the gang that did that?"

"You suspect him, too?"

Brangwyn nodded. "I took a few audiovisuals of him, when he didn't
know it; I sent them to some different law-enforcement people over in
Morven, where he says he comes from. They never saw him before, and
couldn't find anybody who did."

"Well? He just doesn't have a police record, then."

"He says he's a preacher. Preachers don't go off in the woods by
themselves to preach; they get up in pulpits, in front of a lot of
people. Those towns over in Morven are small enough for everybody to
have known something about him. He's a fake, I tell you."

"Let me have copies of those audiovisuals, Tom. I'll see what can be
found out about him. I'm beginning to wonder about him myself. I'm
sure I've seen him, somewhere...."

When he got back to Storisende, he found that the marathon conference
on the sixth floor down at the Interplanetary Building had finally
come to an end. Everybody seemed satisfied, and apparently nobody was
going to have pistols and coffee with anybody else about it.

"We have things fixed up," his father told him. "The gang who are
building the ship out of four air-freighters are chartered as Janicot
Industries, Ltd.; they're going to specialize in chemical products.
The other company has a charter now, too. They're going to operate on
Jurgen and Horvendile. We'll sell them ships, and Alpha-Interplanetary
will put on scheduled trips to all three planets and also Koshchei.
We're getting along very nicely with them, except that everybody's
competing for technicians and skilled labor. We have two hundred more
people signed up for Koshchei. What you want to do is train as many of
them as you can for ship-operation. Alpha-Interplanetary is going to
start a training program here at Storisende; you'd better leave one of
your ships for them to work on, and send back as many ships as you can
find officers and crews for."

"We're getting things really started."

"Yes. The only trouble is...." His father frowned. "I don't understand
these people, Conn. Everybody ought to be making millions out of this
by this time next year, but all any of them, even these Storisende
bankers, can talk about is how soon we're going to find Merlin."

"I wish we could stop that, somehow. Listen; I have it. Merlin never
was on Poictesme; Merlin was a space-station a few thousand miles
off-planet; there was a crew of operators aboard, and they
communicated with Force Command by radio. When the War ended, they
took it outside the system and shot off a planetbuster inside her. No
more Merlin. How would that be?"

His father shook his head. "Wouldn't do. If anybody believed it, which
I doubt, they'd just quit. The market would collapse, everybody would
be broke, it would just be the end of the War all over again. Conn, we
can't let it stop now. We're going too fast to stop; if we tried it,
we'd smash up and break our necks."




XVIII


Jerry Rivas, Mack Vibart and Luther Chen-Wong had been keeping things
running on Koshchei. Work on the interplanetary ship at Port
Carpenter had stopped when the Sickle Mountain ships had been found;
it had never been resumed. When Conn returned, he found work started
on the _Ouroboros II_. Some of the two hundred newcomers who came in
on the _Helen O'Loy_ had special skills needed on the hypership; most
of them went with Clyde Nichols and Charley Gatworth to Sickle
Mountain to train as normal-space officers and crewmen. Some of them,
it was hoped, would later qualify for hyperspace work. Sylvie, who had
been one of the star pupils in the computer class, was now helping him
with the long lists of needed materials, some of which had to be
brought from other places as much as a thousand miles away. Jerry
Rivas went back to exploring; Nichols had to drop his space-training
work temporarily to organize a fleet of air-freighters; usually, the
men best able to operate them were urgently needed on some job at the
construction dock.

Ships lifted out almost daily from Sickle Mountain. They tried to get
some kind of salable cargo for each one, without depriving themselves
of what they needed for themselves. Some of the ships came back loaded
with provisions and bringing new recruits--for instance, the teaching
of physics and mathematics almost stopped at Storisende College
because the professors had been virtually shanghaied.

Conn found himself losing touch with affairs on Poictesme. Ships had
landed on both Janicot and Horvendile and were sending back claims to
abandoned factories. By that time they had all the decks into the
_Ouroboros II_, and he was working aboard, getting the astrogational
and hyperspace instruments put in place. The hypership _Andromeda_ was
back from the Gamma System; there was close secrecy about what the
expedition had found, but the newscasts were full of conjectures about
Merlin, and the market went into another dizzy upward spiral.
Litchfield Exploration & Salvage opened a huge munitions depot, and
combat equipment, once almost unsalable, was selling as fast as it
came out. The Government was buying some, but by no means all of it.

"Conn, can you come back here to Poictesme for a while?" his father
asked. "Things have turned serious. I don't like to talk about it by
screen--too many people know our scrambler combinations. But I wish
you were here."

He started to object; there were millions, well, a couple of hundred,
things he had to attend to. The look on his father's face stopped him.

"Ship leaving Sickle Mountain tomorrow morning," he said. "I'll be
aboard."

The voyage back to Poictesme was a needed rest. He felt refreshed when
he got off at Storisende Spaceport and was met by his father and Wade
Lucas in one of the slim recon-cars. They greeted him briefly and took
the car up and away from the city, where it was safe to talk.

"Conn, I'm scared," his father said. "I'm beginning to think there
really is a Merlin, after all."

"Oh, come off it! I know it's contagious, but I thought you'd been
vaccinated."

"I'm beginning to think so, too," Lucas said. "I don't like it at
all."

"You know what that gang who took the _Andromeda_ to Panurge found?"

"They were looking for the plant that fabricated the elements for
Merlin, weren't they?"

"Yes. They found it. My Barton-Massarra operatives got to some of the
crew. This place had been turning out material for a computer of
absolutely unconventional design; the two computermen they had with
them couldn't make head or tail of half of it. And every blueprint,
every diagram, every scrap of writing or recording, had been
destroyed. But they found one thing, a big empty fiber folder that had
fallen under something and been overlooked. It was marked: TOP
SECRET. PROJECT MERLIN."

"Project Merlin could have been anything," Conn started to say. No.
Project Merlin was something they made computer parts for.

"Dolf Kellton's research crew, at the Library here, came across some
references to Project Merlin, too. For instance, there was a routine
division court-martial, a couple of second lieutenants, on a very
trivial charge. Force Command ordered the court-martial stopped, and
the two officers simply dropped out of the Third Force records, it was
stated that they were engaged in work connected with Project Merlin.
That's an example; there were half a dozen things like that."

"Tell him what Kurt Fawzi and his crew found," Wade Lucas said.

"Yes. They have a fifty-foot shaft down from the top of the mesa
almost to the top of the underground headquarters. They found
something on top of the headquarters; a disc-shaped mass, fifty feet
thick and a hundred across, armored in collapsium. It's directly over
what used to be Foxx Travis's office."

"That's not a tenth big enough for anything that could even resemble
Merlin."

"Well, it's something. I was out there day before yesterday. They're
down to the collapsium on top of this thing; I rode down the shaft in
a jeep and looked at it. Look, Conn, we don't know what this Project
Merlin was; all this lore about Merlin that's grown up since the War
is pure supposition."

"But Foxx Travis told me, categorically, that there was no Merlin
Project," Conn said. "The War's been over forty years; it's not a
military secret any longer. Why would he lie to me?"

"Why did you lie to Kurt Fawzi and the others and tell them there was
a Merlin? You lied because telling the truth would hurt them. Maybe
Travis had the same reason for lying to you. Maybe Merlin's too
dangerous for anybody to be allowed to find."

"Great Ghu, are you beginning to think Merlin is the Devil, or
Frankenstein's Monster?"

"It might be something just as bad. Maybe worse. I don't think a man
like Foxx Travis would lie if he didn't have some overriding moral
obligation to."

"And we know who's been making most of the trouble for us, too," Lucas
added.

"Yes," Rodney Maxwell said, "we do. And sometime I'm going to invite
Klem Zareff to kick my pants-seat. Sam Murchison, the Terran
Federation Minister-General."

"How'd you get that?"

"Barton-Massarra got some of it; they have an operative planted in
Murchison's office. And some of our banking friends got the rest. This
Human Supremacy League is being financed by somebody. Every so often,
their treasurer makes a big deposit at one of the banks here, all
Federation currency, big denomination notes. When I asked them to,
they started keeping a record of the serial numbers and checking
withdrawals. The money was paid out, at the First Planetary Bank, to
Mr. Samuel S. Murchison, in person. The Armegeddonists are getting
money, too, but they're too foxy to put theirs through the banks. I
believe they're the ones who mind-probed Lucy Nocero. Barton-Massarra
believe, but they can't prove, that Human Supremacy launched that
robo-bomb at us, that time at the spaceport."

"Have you done anything with those audiovisuals of Leibert?"

"Gave them to Barton-Massarra. They haven't gotten anything, yet."

"So we have to admit that Klem wasn't crazy after all. What do you
want me to do?"

"Go out to Force Command and take charge. We have to assume that there
may be a Merlin, we have to assume that it may be dangerous, and we
have to assume that Kurt Fawzi and his covey of Merlinolators are just
before digging it up. Your job is to see that whatever it is doesn't
get loose."

The trouble was, if he started giving orders around Force Command he'd
stop being a brilliant young man and become a half-baked kid, and one
word from him and the older and wiser heads would do just what they
pleased. He wondered if the pro-Leibert and anti-Leibert factions were
still squabbling; maybe if he went out of his way to antagonize one
side, he'd make allies of the other. He took the precaution of
screening in, first; Kurt Fawzi, with whom he talked, was almost
incoherent with excitement. At least, he was reasonably sure that none
of Klem Zareff's trigger-happy mercenaries would shoot him down coming
in.

The well, fifty feet in diameter, went straight down from the top of
the mesa; as the headquarters had been buried under loose rubble,
they'd had to vitrify the sides going down. He let down into the hole
in a jeep, and stood on the collapsium roof of whatever it was they
had found. It wasn't the top of the headquarters itself; the microray
scannings showed that. It was a drum-shaped superstructure, a sort of
underground penthouse. And there they were stopped. You didn't cut
collapsium with a cold chisel, or even an atomic torch. He began to
see how he was going to be able to take charge here.

"You haven't found any passage leading into it?" he asked, when they
were gathered in Fawzi's--formerly Foxx Travis's--office.

"Nifflheim, no! If we had, we'd be inside now." Tom Brangwyn swore.
"And we've been all over the ceiling in here, and we can't find
anything but vitrified rock and then the collapsium shielding."

"Sure. There are collapsium-cutters, at Port Carpenter, on Koshchei.
They do it with cosmic rays."

"But collapsium will stop cosmic rays," Zareff objected.

"Stop them from penetrating, yes. A collapsium-cutter doesn't
penetrate; it abrades. Throws out a rotary beam and works like a
grinding-wheel, or a buzz-saw."

"Well, could you get one down that hole?" Judge Ledue asked.

He laughed. "No. The thing is rather too large. In the first place,
there's a full-sized power-reactor, and a mass-energy converter. With
them, you produce negamatter--atoms with negatively charged protons
and positive electrons, positrons. Then, you have to bring them into
contact with normal positive-matte--That's done in a chamber the size
of a fifty-gallon barrel, made of collapsium and weighing about a
hundred tons. Then you have to have a pseudograv field to impart
rotary motion to your cosmic-ray beam, and the generator door that
would lift ten ships the size of the _Lester Dawes_. Then you need
another fifty to a hundred tons of collapsium to shield your
cutting-head. The cutting-head alone weighs three tons. The rotary
beam that does the cutting," he mentioned as an afterthought, "is
about the size of a silver five-centisol piece."

Nobody said anything for a few seconds. Carl Leibert stated that
Divine Power would aid them. Nobody paid much attention; Leibert's
stock seemed to have gone bearish since he had found nothing in the
butte and Fawzi had found that whatever-it-was on top of Force
Command.

"Means we're going to dig the whole blasted top off, clear down to
where that thing is," Zareff said. "That'll take a year."

"Oh, no. Maybe a couple of weeks, after we get started," Conn told
them. "It'll take longer to get the stuff loaded on a ship and hauled
here than it will to get that thing uncovered and opened."

He told them about the machines they used in the iron mines on
Koshchei, and as he talked, he stopped worrying about how he was going
to take charge here. He had just been unanimously elected
Indispensable Man.

"Bless you, young man!" Carl Leibert cried. "At last, the Great
Computer! Those who come after will reckon this the Year Zero of the
Age of Regeneration. I will go to my chamber and return thanks in
prayer."

"He's been doing a lot of praying lately," Tom Brangwyn remarked,
after Leibert had gone out. "He's moved into the chaplain's quarters,
back of the pandenominational chapel on the fourth level down. Always
keeps his door locked, too."

"Well, if he wants privacy for his devotions, that's his business.
Maybe we could all do with a little prayer," Veltrin said.

"Probably praying to Sam Murchison by radio," Klem Zareff retorted.
"I'd like to see inside those rooms of his."

He called Yves Jacquemont at Port Carpenter after dinner. When he told
Jacquemont what he wanted and why, the engineer remarked that it was a
pity screens couldn't be fitted with olfactory sensors, so that he
could smell Conn's breath.

"I am not drunk. I am not crazy. And I am not exercising my sense of
humor. I don't know what Fawzi and his gang have here, but if it isn't
Merlin it's something just as hot. We want at it, soonest, and we'll
have to dig a couple of hundred feet of rock off it and open a
collapsium can."

"How are we going to get that stuff on a ship?"

"Anything been done to that normal-space job we started since I saw it
last? Can you find engines for it? And is there anything about those
mining machines or the cutter that would be damaged by space-radiation
or re-entry heat?"

Yves Jacquemont was silent for a good deal longer than the
interplanetary time-lag warranted. Finally he nodded.

"I get it, Conn. We won't put the things in a ship; we'll build a ship
around them. No; that stuff can all be hauled open to space. They use
things like that at space stations and on asteroids and all sorts of
places. We'll have to stop work on _Ouroboros_, though."

"Let _Ouroboros_ wait. We are going to dig up Merlin, and then
everybody is going to be rich and happy, and live happily forever
after."

Jacquemont looked at him, silent again for longer than the usual five
and a half minutes.

"You almost said that with a straight face." After all, Jacquemont
hadn't been cleared yet for the Awful Truth About Merlin, but, like
his daughter, he'd been doing some guessing. "I wish I knew how much
of this Merlin stuff you believe."

"So do I, Yves. Maybe after we get this thing open, I'll know."

To give himself a margin of safety, Jacquemont had estimated the
arrival of the equipment at three weeks. A week later, he was
on-screen to report that the skeleton ship--they had christened her
_The Thing_, and when Conn saw screen views of her he understood
why--was finished and the collapsium-cutter and two big mining
machines were aboard. Evidently nobody on Koshchei had done a stroke
of work on anything else.

"Sylvie's coming along with her; so are Jerry Rivas and Anse Dawes and
Ham Matsui and Gomez and Karanja and four or five others. They'll be
ready to go to work as soon as she lands and unloads," Jacquemont
added.

That was good; they were all his own people, unconnected with any of
the Merlin-hunting factions at Force Command. In case trouble started,
he could rely on them.

"Well, dig out some shootin'-irons for them," he advised. "They may
need them here."

Depending, of course, on what they found when they opened that
collapsium can on top of Force Command, and how the people there
reacted to it.

_The Thing_ took a hundred and seventy hours to make the trip;
conditions in the small shielded living quarters and control cabin
were apparently worse than on the _Harriet Barne_ on her second trip
to Koschchei. Everybody at Force Command was anxious and excited. Carl
Leibert kept to his quarters most of the time, as though he had to
pray the ship across space.

At the same time, reports of the near completion of _Ouroboros II_
were monopolizing the newscasts, to distract public attention from
what was happening at Force Command. Cargo was being collected for
her; instead of washing their feet in brandy, next year people would
be drinking water. Lorenzo Menardes had emptied his warehouses of
everything over a year old; so had most of the other distillers up and
down the Gordon Valley. Melon and tobacco planters were talking about
breaking new ground and increasing their cultivated acreage for the
next year. Agricultural machinery was in demand and bringing high
prices. So were stills, and tobacco-factory machinery. It began to
look as though the Maxwell Plan was really getting started.

It was decided to send the hypership to Baldur on her first voyage;
that was Wade Lucas's suggestion. He was going with her himself, to
recruit scientific and technical graduates from his alma mater, the
University of Paris-on-Baldur, and from the other schools there. Conn
was enthusiastic about that, remembering the so-called engineers on
Koshchei, running around with a monkey-wrench in one hand and a
textbook in the other, trying to find out what they were supposed to
do while they were doing it. Poictesme had been living for too long on
the leavings of wartime production; too few people had bothered
learning how to produce anything.

_The Thing_ finally settled onto the mesa-top. It looked like
something from an old picture of the construction work on one of the
Terran space-stations in the First Century. Immediately, every piece
of contragravity equipment in the place converged on her; men dangled
on safety lines hundreds of feet above the ground, cutting away beams
and braces with torches. The two giant mining machines, one after the
other, floated free on their own contragravity and settled into place.
_The Thing_ lifted, still carrying the collapsium-cutting equipment,
and came to rest on the brush-grown flat beyond, out of the way.

If Yves Jacquemont had overestimated the time required to get the
equipment loaded and lifted off from Koshchei, Conn had been
overoptimistic about the speed with which the top of the mesa could be
stripped off. Digging away the rubble with which the pit had been
filled, and even the solid rock around it, was easier than getting the
stuff out of the way. Farm-scows came in from all over, as fast as
they and pilots for them could be found; the rush to get brandy and
tobacco to Storisende had caused an acute shortage of vehicles.

One by one, the members of the old Fawzi's Office gang came drifting
in--Lorenzo Menardes, Morgan Gatworth, Lester Dawes. None of them had
any skills to contribute, but they brought plenty of enthusiasm.
Rodney Maxwell came whizzing out from Storisende now and then to watch
the progress of the work. Of all the crowd, he and Conn watched the
two steel giants strip away the tableland with apprehension instead of
hope. No, there was a third. Carl Leibert had stopped secluding
himself in his quarters; he still talked rapturously about the
miracles Merlin would work, but now and then Conn saw him when he
thought he was unobserved. His face was the face of a condemned man.

The _Ouroboros II_ was finished. The whole planet saw, by
screen, the ship lift out; watched from the ship the dwindling away
of Koshchei and saw Poictesme grow ahead of her. Twelve hours before
she landed, work at Force Command stopped. Everybody was going to
Storisende--Sylvie, whose father would command her on her voyage to
Baldur, Morgan Gatworth, whose son would be first officer and
astrogator, everybody. Except Carl Leibert.

"Then I'm not going either," Klem Zareff decided. "Somebody's got to
stay here and keep an eye on that snake."

"No, nor me," Tom Brangwyn said. "And if he starts praying again, I'm
going to go and pray along with him."

Conn stayed, too, and so did Jerry Rivas and Anse Dawes. They watched
the newscast of the lift-out, a week later. It was peaceful and
harmonious; everybody, regardless of their attitudes on Merlin, seemed
agreed that this was the beginning of a new prosperity for the planet.
There were speeches. The bands played "Genji Gartner's Body," and the
"Spaceman's Hymn."

And, at the last, when the officers and crew were going aboard, Conn
saw his sister Flora clinging to Wade Lucas's arm. She was one of the
small party who went aboard for a final farewell. When she came off,
along with Sylvie, she was wiping her eyes, and Sylvie was comforting
her. Seeing that made Conn feel better even than watching the ship
itself lift away from Storisende.




XIX


When Sylvie returned from Storisende, she had Flora with her. Conn's
sister greeted him embarrassedly; Sylvie led both of them out of the
crowd and over to the edge of the excavation.

"Go ahead, Flora," she urged. "Make up with Conn. It won't be any
harder than making up with Wade was."

"How did that happen, by the way?" Conn asked.

"Your girlfriend," Flora said. "She came to the house and practically
forced me into a car and flew me into Storisende, and then made me
keep quiet and listen while Wade told me the truth."

"I wasn't completely sure what the truth was myself till Wade opened
up," Sylvie admitted. "I had a pretty good idea, though."

"I always hated that Merlin thing," Flora burst out. "All those old
men in Fawzi's office, dreaming about the wonderful things Merlin was
going to do, with everything crumbling around them and everybody
getting poorer every year, and doing nothing, nothing! And when you
were coming home, I was expecting you to tell them there was no Merlin
and to go to work and do something for themselves. But you didn't, and
I couldn't see what you were trying to do. And then when Wade joined
you and Father, I thought he was either helping you put over some kind
of a swindle or else he'd started believing in Merlin himself. I
should have seen what you were trying to do from the beginning. At
least, from when you talked them into cleaning the town up and fixing
the escalators and getting the fountains going again."

So the fountains weren't dusty any more.

"How's Mother taking things now?"

Flora looked distressed. "She goes around wringing her hands.
Honestly. I never saw anybody doing that outside a soap opera. Half
the time she thinks you and Father are a pair of unprincipled
scoundrels, and the other half she thinks you're going to let Merlin
destroy the world."

"I'm beginning to be afraid of something like that myself."

"Huh? But Merlin's just a big fake, isn't it? You're using it to make
these people do something they wouldn't do for themselves, aren't
you?"

"It started that way. What do you think all this is about?" he asked,
gesturing toward the excavation and the two giant mining machines
digging and blasting and pounding away at the rock.

"Well, to keep Kurt Fawzi and that crowd happy, I suppose. It seems
like an awful waste of time, though."

"I'm afraid it isn't. I'm afraid Merlin, or something just as bad, is
down there. That's why I'm here, instead of on Koshchei. I want to
keep people like Fawzi from doing anything foolish with it when they
find it."

"But there _can't_ be a Merlin!"

"I'm afraid there is. Not the sort of a Merlin Fawzi expects to find;
that thing's too small for that. But there's something down there...."

The question of size bothered him. That drum-shaped superstructure
couldn't even hold the personnel-record machine they had found here,
or the computers at the Storisende Stock Exchange. It could have been
an intelligence-evaluator, or an enemy-intentions predictor, but it
seemed small even for that. It would be something _like_ a computer;
that was as far as he was able to go. And it could be something
completely outside the reach of his imagination.

At the back of his mind, the suspicion grew that Carl Leibert knew
exactly what it was. And he became more and more convinced that he had
seen the self-styled preacher before.

Finally, the whole top of the hundred-foot collapsium-covered
structure was uncovered, and the excavation had been leveled out wide
enough to accommodate all the massive paraphernalia of the
collapsium-cutter. They put _The Thing_ onto contragravity again, and
brought her down in place; the work of lifting off the reactor and the
converter and the rest of it, piece by piece, began. Finally,
everything was set up.

A dozen and a half of them were gathered in the room that had become
their meeting-place, after dinner. They were all too tired to start
the cutting that night, and at the same time excited and anxious. They
talked in disconnected snatches, and then somebody put on one of the
telecast screens. A music program was just ending; there was a brief
silence, and then a commentator appeared, identifying his
news-service. He spoke rapidly and breathlessly, his professional
gravity cracking all over.

"The hypership _City of Asgard_, from Aton, has just come into
telecast range," he began. "We have received an exclusive Interworld
News Service story, recently brought to Aton on the Pan-Federation
Spacelines ship _Magellanic_, from Terra.

"News of revived interest in the Third Force computer, Merlin, having
reached Terra by way of Odin, representatives of Interworld News, to
which this service subscribes, interviewed retired Force-General Foxx
Travis, now living, at the advanced age of a hundred and fourteen, on
Luna. General Travis, who commanded the Third Fleet-Army Force here
during the War, categorically denied that there had ever existed any
super-computer of the sort.

"We bring you, now, a recorded interview with General Travis, made on
Luna...."

For an instant, Conn felt the room around him whirling dizzily, and
then he caught hold of himself. Everybody else was shouting in sudden
consternation, and then everybody was hushing everybody else and
making twice as much noise. The screen flickered; the commentator
vanished, and instead, seated in the deep-cushioned chair, was the
thin and frail old man with whom Conn had talked two years before, and
through an open segment of the dome-roof behind him the full Earth
shone, the continents of the Western Hemisphere plainly
distinguishable. A young woman in starchy nurse's white bent forward
solicitously from beside the chair, handing him a small beaker from
which he sipped some stimulant. He looked much as he had when Conn had
talked to him. But there was something missing....

Oh, yes. The comparative youngster of seventy-some--"Mike Shanlee ...
my _aide-de-camp_ on Poictesme ... now he thinks he's my keeper...."
He wasn't in evidence, and he should be. Then Conn knew where and when
he had seen the man who claimed to be a preacher named Carl Leibert.

"There is absolutely no truth in it, gentlemen," Travis was saying.
"There never was any such computer. I only wish there had been; it
would have shortened the War by years. We did, of course, use
computers of all sorts, but they were all the conventional types used
by business organizations...."

The rest was lost in a new outburst of shouting: General Travis, in
the screen, continued in dumb-show. The only thing Conn could
distinguish was Leibert's--Shanlee's--voice, screaming: "Can it be a
lie? Is there no Great Computer?" Then Kurt Fawzi was pounding on the
top of the desk and bellowing, "Shut up! Listen!"

"Frankly, I'm surprised," Travis was continuing. "Young Maxwell talked
to me, here in this room, a couple of years ago; I told him then that
nothing of the sort existed. If he's back on Poictesme telling people
there is, he's lying to them and taking advantage of their credulity.
There never was anything called Project Merlin...."

"Hah, who's a liar now?" Klem Zareff shouted. "Dolf, what did your
people find in the Library?"

"Why, that's right!" Professor Kellton exclaimed. "My students did
find a dozen references to Project Merlin. He couldn't be ignorant of
anything like that."

"This youth has been lying to us all along!" the old man with the
beard cried, pointing an accusing finger at Conn. "He has created
false hopes; he has given us faith in a delusion. Why, he is the
wickedest monster in human history!"

"Well, thank you, General Travis," another voice, from the
screen-speaker, was saying. The only calm voice in the room. "That was
a most excellent statement, sir. It should...."

"Conn, you didn't tell us you'd talked to General Travis," Morgan
Gatworth was saying. "Why didn't you?"

"Because I never believed anything he told me. You were in Kurt
Fawzi's office the day I came home; you know how shocked everybody was
when I told you I hadn't been able to learn anything positive. Why
should I repeat his lies and discourage everybody that much more? Why,
he'd deny there was a Merlin if he was sitting on top of it," Conn
declared. "He wants the credit for winning the War, not for letting
Merlin win it for him."

"I don't blame Conn," Klem Zareff said. "If he'd told us that then,
some of us might have believed it."

"And look what we found," Kurt Fawzi added, pointing at the ceiling.
"Is that Merlin up there, or isn't it?"

"That little thing!" Shanlee cried scornfully. "How could that be
Merlin? I am going to my chamber, to pray for forgiveness for this
wretch."

He turned and started for the door.

"Stop him, Tom!" Conn said, and Tom Brangwyn put himself in front of
the older man, gripping his right arm. Shanlee tried, briefly, to
resist.

"Seems to me you lost faith in Merlin awfully quick," the former town
marshal of Litchfield said. "You knew there was a Merlin all along,
and you never wanted us to find it."

Franz Veltrin, who had been "Leibert's" most enthusiastic adherent,
had also lost faith suddenly; he was shouting vituperation at the
Prophet of Merlin.

"Knock it off, Franz; he was only doing his duty," Conn said. "Weren't
you, General Shanlee?"

It took almost a minute before they stopped yelling for an explanation
and allowed him to make one. He caught Klem Zareff's comment: "Must be
pretty hot, if they have to send a general to handle it."

"I talked to Travis, yes. He gave me the same story he just repeated
on that interview," Conn said, picking his way carefully between fact
and fiction. "After I went back to Montevideo, he and this aide of his
must have been afraid I didn't believe it, which I didn't. When I was
ready to graduate, I got this offer of an instructorship; that was a
bribe to keep me on Terra and off Poictesme. When I turned it down and
took the _Mizar_ home, Travis sent Shanlee after me. He must have
grown that beard and that pageboy bob on the way out. I suppose he
contacted Murchison as soon as he landed. Wait a minute."

He went to the communication screen and punched out a combination. A
girl appeared and singsonged: "Barton-Massarra, Investigation and
Protection."

"Conn Maxwell here. We gave you some audiovisuals of a man with a
white beard, alias Carl Leibert," he began.

"Just a sec, Mr. Maxwell." She spoke quickly into a handphone. The
screen flickered, and she was replaced by a hard-faced young man in
dark clothes.

"Hello, Mr. Maxwell; Joe Massarra. We haven't anything on Leibert
yet."

"Are any of the officers of the _Andromeda_ where you can contact
them? Let them see those audiovisual. I'll bet that beard was grown
aboard ship coming out from Terra."

Bedlam broke out suddenly. Shanlee, who had been standing passively,
his right arm loosely grasped by Tom Brangwyn, came down on Brangwyn's
instep with the heel of his left foot and hit Brangwyn under the chin
with the heel of his left palm. Wrenching his arm free, he started for
the door. Sylvie Jacquemont snatched a chair and threw it along the
floor; it hit the fleeing man's ankles and brought him down. Half a
dozen men piled on top of him, and Brangwyn was yelling to them not to
choke him to death till he could answer some questions.

"Hey, what's going on?" the detective-agency man in the screen was
asking. "Need help? We'll start a car right away."

"Everything's under control, thank you."

Massarra hesitated for a moment. "What's the dope on this statement
that was on telecast a few minutes ago?" he asked.

"Travis doesn't want us to find Merlin. What you just heard was one of
his people, planted here at Force Command. We're going to question him
when we have time. But there isn't a word of truth in that statement
you just heard on the _Herald-Guardian_ newscast. Merlin exists, and
we've found it. We'll have it opened inside of thirty hours at most."

That was the line he was going to take with everybody. As soon as he
had Massarra off the screen, he was punching the combination of his
father's private screen at Interplanetary Building. It took five
interminable minutes before Rodney Maxwell came on. He could hear Klem
Zareff shouting orders into one of the inside communication
screens--general turnout, everything on combat-ready; guards to come
at once to the office.

"How close are you to digging that thing out?" his father asked as
soon as he appeared.

"We're down to it; we can start cutting the collapsium any time now."

"Start cutting it ten minutes ago," his father told him. "And don't
leave Force Command till you have it open. How many men and vehicles
does Klem have for defense? You'll need all of them in a couple of
hours. Everybody here is stunned, now; they'll come out of it inside
an hour, and they'll come out fighting."

"You'd better come out here." He turned, saw Jerry Rivas helping hold
Shanlee in a chair, and shouted to him: "Jerry! Turn out the workmen.
Start cutting the can open right away." He turned back to his father.
"Klem's just ordered all his force out. Are you coming here?"

"I can't. In about an hour, everything's going up with a bang. I have
to be here to grab a few of the pieces."

"You'll do a lot of good in jail, or on the end of a rope."

"Chance I have to take," his father replied. "I think I'll have a
couple of hours. If anybody from the press calls you, what are you
going to tell them?"

Conn repeated the line he had taken already. His father nodded.

"All right. I'll call you later. If I can. Just keep things going at
your end."

A dozen of Klem Zareff's men were crowding into the room.

"This man's under close arrest," the old soldier was telling them. "He
is very important and very dangerous. Take him out somewhere, search
him to the skin, take his clothes away from him and give him a robe.
He's to be watched every second; make sure he hasn't poison or other
suicide means. He's to be questioned later."

As soon as Rodney Maxwell was off the screen, there was a call-signal.
It was one of the news-services, wanting a statement.

"I'll take it," Gatworth said, and then began talking:

"This statement of General Travis's is completely false. There is a
Merlin, and we've found it...."

They found something that might be good-enough Merlin for the next
thirty hours. That superstructure was just big enough for the manually
operated parts of a computer like Merlin; the input and output, and
the programming machines.




XX


Klem Zareff's guardsmen were mercenaries. A little over a year ago
they had, at best, been homeless drifters, and not a few had been
outlaws. Now they were soldiers, well fed, clothed, quartered and
equipped, and well and regularly paid. They had a good thing; they
were willing to fight to keep it, Merlin or no Merlin. Conn left them
to their commander. He did gather the workmen for a short harangue,
but that wasn't really necessary. They had a good thing, too, and most
of them realized that they were working toward a better thing. They
could be depended upon, too.

They came crowding out and manned lifters; they got the heavy
collapsium-cutter maneuvered into place and the shielding down around
the cutting-head. After that, there were only four men who could work,
each in his own heavily shielded cabin. In spite of the shielding that
covered the actual work, there was an awesome display of multicolored
light; it was like being in the middle of an aurora borealis. What was
going on where that tiny rotating beam of cosmic rays was grinding at
the collapsium simply couldn't have been imagined.

Conn would have liked to stay outside; he could not. Too many things
were happening in too many places, and it was all coming in by screen.
Rioting had broken out in Storisende and in a dozen other places. He
saw, on a news-screen, a mob raging in front of the Executive Palace;
yellow-shirted Cybernarchists were battling with city police and
Planetary troops, Armageddonists and Human Supremacy Leaguers were
fighting both and one another. Above all the confused noise of
shouting and shooting, an amplifier was braying: "_It's a lie! It's a
lie! Merlin has been found!_" Newsmen began arriving--Zareff's men
had orders to pass them through the cordon that had been put up around
Force Command--and they took up his time. It was worth it, though.
They could tell him what was going on.

J. Fitzwilliam Sterber called. Rodney Maxwell had been arrested, on a
farrago of fraud charges--"I don't know who he's supposed to have
defrauded; the Planetary Government is the sole complainant"--and bail
was being illegally denied. Sterber's lawyerly soul was outraged, but
he was grimly elated. "You wait till things quiet down a little. We're
going to start a false-arrest suit--"

"If you're alive to." Apparently Sterber hadn't thought of that. "What
do you think's going to happen when the Stock Exchange opens?"

"It's going to be bad. But don't worry; your father must have foreseen
something like this. He gave me instructions, and instructed a few
more people." He named some of the Trisystem Investments people and
some of the bankers. "We're going to try to brace the market as long
as we can. Nobody who keeps his head is going to lose anything in the
long run."

Luther Chen-Wong called from Port Carpenter, on Koshchei. He and Clyde
Nichols and a young mathematics professor named Simon Macquarte had
been running the colony, in Conn's absence and since Yves Jacquemont
had gone to space in the _Ouroboros II_.

"Well, they caught up with you," he said. Evidently he had figured out
what the search for Merlin was all about, too. "What do we do about
it?"

"Well, we are just before finding Merlin, here. I hope we find it
before things get too bad." He told Luther the situation of the
moment. "Have you people started on another hypership yet?"

"We're getting organized to. I don't suppose it's advisable to send
any more ships in to Storisende for a while? And are you sure this
thing you've found is Merlin?"

"I don't know what it is. It's only big enough for the apparatus
they'd need to operate a thing like Merlin--Yes, Luther. I am sure we
have found Merlin."

Chen-Wong looked at him curiously. "I hope so. I can't think of
anything else that can stop this business."

Tom Brangwyn was in the room when he turned from the screen.

"We searched Leibert's--Shanlee's--rooms," he said. "We found a bomb."

"What kind of a bomb?"

"Vest-pocket thermonuclear. He seems to have gotten the fissionables
by taking apart a couple of light tactical missiles; the whole thing's
packed inside a hundred-pound power-cartridge case. It was in a
traveling-bag under his bed. And you know how it was to be fired? With
a regular 40-mm flare-pistol, welded into the end of the bomb. The
flare-powder had been taken out of the cartridge, and it had been
reloaded with a big charge of rifle-powder. I suppose it would blow
one subcritical mass into another. But the only way he could have
fired the bomb would have been by pulling the trigger."

And blowing himself up along with it. He must have wanted Merlin
destroyed pretty badly.

"Have you questioned him yet?"

"Not yet. I wanted to tell you about it first."

He looked at his watch. Only four hours had passed since the newscast;
why, that seemed like months, ago, now.

"All right, Tom; we'll go talk to him. Where's the Colonel?"

Zareff was surrounded by a dozen screens, keeping in touch with the
_Lester Dawes_ and the gunboats and combat cars, and the gun positions
with which he had ringed Force Command. It was only a little army,
maybe, but he was a busy commander-in-chief.

"You take care of it. Tell me what you get from him. I can't leave
now. There's a report of a number of aircraft approaching from the
west now...."

They found Judge Ledue, and Kurt Fawzi and Dolf Kellton, who were just
sitting around wishing there was something to do to help. They gave
Franz Veltrin and Sylvie Jacquemont the job of keeping the
representatives of the press amused. Then they went down to the room
in which General Mike Shanlee was held under guard.

Shanlee, wearing a bathrobe and nothing else, was lying on a cot,
sleeping peacefully; three of Zareff's men were sitting on chairs,
watching him narrowly.

"All right; you can go," Conn told them. "We'll take care of him."

Shanlee woke instantly; he sat up and swung his legs over the edge of
the cot.

"You have my name and rank," he said, and his voice no longer
quavered. "My serial number is--" He recited a string of figures. "And
that's all you're getting out of me."

"We'll get anything we want out of you," Conn told him. "You know what
a mind-probe is? You should; your accomplices used one on my father's
secretary. She's a hopeless imbecile now. You'll be, too, when we're
through with you. But before then, you'll have given us everything you
know."

Kellton began to protest. "Conn, you can't do a thing like that!"

"A mind-probe is utterly illegal; why, it's a capital offense!" Ledue
exclaimed. "Conn I forbid you...."

"Judge, don't make me call those guards and have you removed," Conn
said.

"You can stop bluffing," Shanlee told him. "Where would you get a
mind-probe?"

"Out of the Chief of Intelligence's office, here in his headquarters.
I should imagine it was to be used in interrogating Alliance
prisoners, during the War. I think Colonel Zareff would enjoy helping
to use it on you. He used to be an Alliance officer."

Shanlee was silent. Conn sat down in one of the chairs, at the small
table.

"General Shanlee, would you describe General Foxx Travis as a man of
honor and integrity? And would you so describe yourself?" Shanlee said
nothing. "Yet both of you have lied, deliberately and repeatedly, to
conceal the existence of Merlin. And we found that bomb in your room.
You were willing to blow up this headquarters and everybody, yourself
included, in it, to keep us from getting at Merlin. Well, you know
that we can make you tell us the truth, maybe when it's too late, and
you know that we are going to get Merlin. We're cutting the collapsium
off that thing above now."

Shanlee laughed. "You're supposed to be a computerman. You think that
little thing could be Merlin?"

"The controls and programming machine for Merlin." He turned to Kurt
Fawzi. "You always claimed that Merlin was here in Force Command. You
had it backward. Force Command is inside Merlin."

"What do you mean, Conn?"

"The walls; the fifty-foot walls, shielded inside and out. Merlin--the
circuitry, the memory-bank, the relays, everything--was installed
inside them. What's up above is only what was needed to operate the
computer. Isn't that true, General?"

Shanlee had stopped his derisive laughter. He sat on the edge of the
cot, tensing as though for a leap at Conn's throat.

"That won't help, either. If you try it, we won't shoot you. We'll
just overpower you and start mind-probing right away. Now; you feel
that suppressing Merlin was worth any sacrifice. We're not
unreasonable. If you can convince us that Merlin ought not to be
brought to light.... Well, you can't do any harm by talking, and you
may do some good. You may even accomplish your mission."

"He can't talk us out of it," Kurt Fawzi seemed determined to spoil
things by saying. "Conn, I'm coming around to Klem's way of thinking.
They just don't want anybody else to have it."

"No, we don't," Shanlee said. "We don't want the whole Federation
breaking up into bloody anarchy, and that's what'll happen if you dig
that thing up and put it into operation."

Nobody said anything except Fawzi, who began an indignant
contradiction and then subsided. Tom Brangwyn lit a cigarette.

"Would you mind letting me have one of those?" Shanlee said. "I
haven't had a smoke since I came here. It wouldn't have been in
character."

Brangwyn took one out of the pack, lit it at the tip of his own, and
gave it to Shanlee with his left hand, his right ready to strike.
Shanlee laughed in real amusement.

"Oh, Brother!" he reproved, in his former pious tones. "You distrust
your fellow man; that is a sin."

He rose slowly, the bathrobe flapping at his bare shins, and sat down
across the table from Conn.

"All right," he said. "I'll tell you about it. I'll tell you the
truth, which will be something of a novelty all around."

Shanlee puffed for a moment at the cigarette; it must really have
tasted good after his long abstinence.

"You know, we were really caught off balance when the War ended. It
even caught Merlin short; information lag, of course. The whole
Alliance caved in all at once. Well, we fed Merlin all the data
available, and analyzed the situation. Then we did something we really
weren't called upon to do, because that was policy-planning and wasn't
our province, but we were going to move an occupation army into System
States planets, and we didn't want to do anything that would embarrass
the Federation Government later. We fed Merlin every scrap of
available information on political and economic conditions everywhere
in the Federation, and set up a long-term computation of the general
effects of the War.

"The extrapolation was supposed to run five hundred years in the
future. It didn't. It stopped, at a point a trifle over two hundred
years from now, with a statement that no computation could be made
further because at that point the Terran Federation would no longer
exist."

The others, who had taken chairs facing him, looked at him blankly.

"No more Federation?" Judge Ledue asked incredulously. "Why, the
Federation, the Federation...."

The Federation would last forever. Anybody knew that. There just
couldn't be no more Federation.

"That's right," Shanlee said. "We had trouble believing it, too.
Remember, we were Federation officers. The Federation was our
religion. Just like patriotism used to be, back in the days of
nationalism. We checked for error. We made detail analyses. We ran it
all over again. It was no use.

"In two hundred years, there won't be any Terran Federation. The
Government will collapse, slowly. The Space Navy will disintegrate.
Planets and systems will lose touch with Terra and with one another.
You know what it was like here, just before the War? It will be like
that on every planet, even on Terra. Just a slow crumbling, till
everything is gone; then every planet will start sliding back, in
isolation, into barbarism."

"Merlin predicted that?" Kurt Fawzi asked, shocked.

If Merlin said so, it had to be true.

Shanlee nodded. "So we ran another computation; we added the data of
publication of this prognosis. You know, Merlin can't predict what you
or I would do under given circumstances, but Merlin can handle
large-group behavior with absolute accuracy. If we made public
Merlin's prognosis, the end would come, not in two centuries but in
less than one, and it wouldn't be a slow, peaceful decay; it would be
a bomb-type reaction. Rebellions. Overthrow of Federation authority,
and then revolt and counterrevolt against planetary authority.
Division along sectional or class lines on individual planets.
Interplanetary wars; what we fought the Alliance to prevent. Left in
ignorance of the future, people would go on trying to make do with
what they had. But if they found out that the Federation was doomed,
everybody would be trying to snatch what they could, and end by
smashing everything. Left in ignorance, there might be a planet here
and there that would keep enough of the old civilization to serve, in
five or so centuries, as a nucleus for a new one. Informed in advance
of the doom of the Federation, they would all go down together in the
same bloody shambles, and there would be a Galactic night of barbarism
for no one knows how many thousand years."

"We don't want anything like that to happen!" Tom Brangwyn said, in a
frightened voice.

"Then pull everybody out of here and blow the place up, Merlin along
with it," Shanlee said.

"No! We'll not do that!" Fawzi shouted. "I'll shoot the man dead who
tries it!"

"Why didn't you people blow Merlin up?" Conn asked.

"We'd built it; we'd worked with it. It was part of us, and we were
part of it. We couldn't. Besides, there was a chance that it might
survive the Federation; when a new civilization arose, it would be
useful. We just sealed it. There were fewer than a hundred of us who
knew about it. We all took an oath of secrecy. We spent the rest of
our lives trying to suppress any mention of Merlin or the Merlin
Project. You have no idea how shocked both General Travis and I were
when you told us that the story was still current here on Poictesme.
And when we found that you'd been getting into the records of the
Third Force, I took the next ship I could, a miserable little
freighter, and when I landed and found out what was happening, I
contacted Murchison and scared the life out of him with stories about
a secessionist conspiracy. All this Armageddonist, Human Supremacy,
Merlin-is-the-Devil, stuff that's been going on was started by
Murchison. And he succeeded in scaring Vyckhoven with the
Cybernarchists, too."

"This computation on the future of the Federation is still in the
back-work file?" Conn asked.

Shanlee nodded. "We were criminally reckless; I can see that, now. Let
me beg, again, that you destroy the whole thing."

"We'll have to talk it over among ourselves," Judge Ledue said. "The
five of us, here, cannot presume to speak for everybody. We will, of
course, have to keep you confined; I hope you will understand that we
cannot accept your parole."

"Is there anything you want in the meantime?" Conn asked.

"I would like something to smoke, and some clothes," General Shanlee
said. "And a shave and a haircut."




XXI


All through the night, a shifting blaze of many-colored light rose and
dimmed the stars above the mesa. They stared in awe, marveling at the
energy that was pouring out of the converters into a tiny spot that
inched its way around the collapsium shielding. It must have been
visible for hundreds of miles; it was, for there was a new flood of
rumors circulating in Storisende and repeated and denied by the
newscasts, now running continuously. Merlin had been found. Merlin had
been blown up by Government troops. Merlin was being transported to
Storisende to be installed as arbiter of the Government. Merlin the
Monster was destroying the planet. Merlin the Devil was unchained.

Conn and Kurt Fawzi and Dolf Kellton and Judge Ledue and Tom Brangwyn
clustered together, talking in whispers. They had told nobody, yet, of
the interview with Shanlee.

"You think it would make all that trouble?" Kellton was asking
anxiously, hoping that the others would convince him that it wouldn't.

"Maybe we had better destroy it," Judge Ledue faltered. "You see what
it's done already; the whole planet's in anarchy. If we let this go
on...."

"We can't decide anything like that, just the five of us," Brangwyn
was insisting. "We'll have to get the others together and see what
they think. We have no right to make any decision like this for them."

"They're no more able to make the decision than we are," Conn said.

"But we've got to; they have a right to know...."

"If you decide to destroy Merlin, you'll have to decide to kill me,
first," Kurt Fawzi said, his voice deadly calm. "You won't do it while
I'm alive."

"But, Kurt," Ledue expostulated. "You know why these people here at
Storisende are rioting? It's because they've lost hope, because
they're afraid and desperate. The Terran Federation is something
everybody feels they have to have, for peace and order and welfare. If
people thought it was breaking up, they'd be desperate, too. They'd do
the same insane things these people here on this planet are doing.
General Shanlee was right. Don't destroy the hope that keeps them
sane."

"We don't need to do that," Kurt Fawzi argued. "We can use Merlin to
solve our own problems; we don't need to tell the whole Federation
what's going to happen in two hundred years."

"It would get out; it couldn't help getting out," Ledue said.

"Let's not try to decide it ourselves," Conn said. "Let's get Merlin
into operation, and run a computation on it."

"You mean, ask Merlin to tell us whether it ought to be destroyed or
not?" Ledue asked incredulously. "Let Merlin put itself on trial, and
sentence itself to destruction?"

"Merlin is a computer; computers deal only in facts. Computers are
machines; they have no sense of self-preservation. If Merlin ought to
be destroyed, Merlin will tell us so."

"You willing to leave it up to Merlin, Kurt?" Tom Brangwyn asked.

Fawzi gulped. "Yes. If Merlin says we ought to, we'll have to do it."

Toward noon, a telecast went out from Koshchei, on a dozen different
wave-lengths. Conn, half asleep in a chair in the commander-in-chief's
office, saw Simon Macquarte, the young mathematics professor from
Storisende College who had become one of the leaders of the colony,
appear in the screen. The next moment, he was fully awake, shocked by
Macquarte's words:

"This is not a threat; this is a solemn, even a prayerful, warning. We
do not want to use genocidal weapons of mass destruction against the
world of our birth. But whether we do or not rests solely with you.

"We came here with a dream of a better world, a world of happiness and
plenty for all. We have been working, on Koshchei, to build such a
world on Poictesme. Now you are smashing that dream. When it is gone,
we will have nothing to live for--except revenge. And we will take
that revenge, make no mistake.

"We have the weapons with which to take it. Remember, this was a
Federation naval base and naval arsenal during the War. Here the
Federation Navy built their super-missiles, the missiles which
devastated Ashmodai, and Belphegor, and Baphomet, and hundreds of
these weapons are here. We have them, ready for launching. Once they
are launched, with the robo-pilots set for targets on Poictesme, you
will have a hundred and sixty hours, at the most, to live.

"We will launch them immediately if there is another attack made upon
Force Command Duplicate HQ, or upon Interplanetary Building in
Storisende, or if Rodney Maxwell is killed, no matter by whom or under
what circumstances.

"We beg you, earnestly and prayerfully, not to force us to do this
dreadful thing. We speak to each one of you, for each one of you holds
the fate of the planet in his own hands."

The image faded from the screen. As it did, Conn was looking from one
to another of the people in the room with him. All were dumbfounded,
most of them frightened.

"They wouldn't do it, would they?" Lorenzo Menardes was asking. "Conn,
you know those people. They wouldn't really?"

"Don't depend on it, Lorenzo," Klem Zareff said. "It's hard for a lot
of people to shoot somebody ten feet away with a pistol. But just
sending off a missile; that's nothing but setting a lot of dials and
then pushing a button."

"I'm not worrying about whether they'd do it or not," Conn said. "What
I'm worrying about is how many people will believe they will."

Apparently a good many people did. Zareff's combat vehicles began
reporting a cessation of fighting. The newscasts, repeating the
ultimatum from Koshchei, told of fewer and fewer disorders in the city
or elsewhere; by midafternoon, the rioting had stopped.

By that time, too, Rodney Maxwell was on-screen. He was, Conn noticed,
wearing his pistols again.

"What happened?" he asked. "They let you out on bail?"

Maxwell shook his head. "Charges dismissed; they didn't have anything
to charge me with in the first place. But they haven't let me out
yet."

"You're wearing your guns."

"Yes, but they still have me penned up here at the Executive Palace;
they're practically keeping me in the safe. I wish our people on
Koshchei hadn't mentioned me in their ultimatum; Jake Vyckhoven's
afraid to let me run around loose for fear some lunatic shoots me and
starts the planetbusters coming in. Jake did one good thing, though.
He ordered the Stock Exchange closed, and declared a five-day bank
holiday. By that time, you ought to have Merlin opened and working,
and then the market'll be safe."

Conn simply replied, "I hope so." There was no telling what kind of
taps there might be on the screen his father was using; he couldn't
risk telling him about Shanlee, or about the last computation which
Merlin had made. "If we send the _Lester Dawes_ in, do you think you
might talk them into letting you come out here?"

"I can try."

Flora arrived at Force Command that afternoon.

"I would have come sooner," she said, "but Mother's had a complete
collapse. It happened last evening; she's in the hospital. I was with
her until just an hour and a half ago. She's still unconscious."

"You mean she's in danger?"

"I don't know. They think she's all right, except for the shock. It
was the Travis statement that did it."

"Think I ought to go to her?"

Flora shook her head. "Just keep on with what you're doing here. There
isn't anything you can do for her now."

"The best thing you can do for her, Conn, is prove that you weren't
lying about Merlin," Sylvie told him.

The _Lester Dawes_ didn't make it from Force Command to Storisende and
back until after dark, and the green and white and red and orange
lights were rising in folds and waves. Rodney Maxwell had heard about
his wife's condition; it was the first thing he spoke of when Conn
and Flora and Sylvie met him as he got off the ship.

"There isn't anything we can do, Father," Flora said. "They'll call us
when there's any change."

He said the same thing Sylvie had said. "The only thing we can do is
get that infernal thing uncovered. Once we do this, everything'll be
all right. We'll show your mother that it isn't a fake and it isn't
anything dangerous; we'll put a stop to all these horror-stories about
mechanical devils and living machines...."

Conn drew his father off where the girls couldn't overhear.

"This is something worse," he said. "This is a bomb that could blow up
the whole Federation."

"Are you going nuts, too?" his father demanded.

Conn told him about Shanlee; he repeated, almost word for word, the
story Shanlee had told.

"Do you believe that?" his father asked.

"Don't you? You were in Storisende when the Travis statement came out;
you saw how people acted. If this story gets out, people will be
acting the same way on every planet in the Federation. Not just places
like Poictesme; planets like Terra and Baldur and Marduk and Odin and
Osiris. It would be the end of everything civilized, everywhere."

"Why didn't they use Merlin to save the Federation?"

"It's past saving. It's been past saving since before the War. The War
was what gave it the final shove. If they could have used Merlin to
reverse the process, they wouldn't have sealed it away."

"But you know, Conn, we can't destroy Merlin. If we did, the same
people who went crazy over the Travis statement would go crazy all
over again, worse than ever. We'd be destroying everything we planned
for, and we'd be destroying ourselves. That bluff young Macquarte and
Luther Chen-Wong and Bill Nichols made wouldn't work twice. And if
they weren't bluffing...."

His father shuddered.

"And if we don't, how long do you think civilization will last here,
if it blows up all over the rest of the Federation?"

The big machine cut on, a little spot of raw energy grinding away the
collapsium, inch by inch; the undulating curtains of colored light
illuminated the Badlands for miles around. Then, when the first hint
of dawn came into the east, they went out. The steady roar of the
generators that had battered every ear for over twenty-four hours
stopped. There was unbelieving silence, and then shouts.

The workmen swarmed out to man lifters. Slowly the heavy
apparatus--the reactor and the converters, the cutting machine, and
the shielding around it--was lifted away. Finally, a lone lifter came
in and men in radiation-suits went down to hook on grapples, and it
lifted away, carrying with it a ten-foot-square sheet of thin steel
that weighed almost thirty tons.

When they had battered a hole in the vitrified rock underneath, guards
brought up General Shanlee. Somebody almost up to professional
standards had given him a haircut; the beard was gone, too. A
Federation Army officer's uniform had been found reasonably close to
his size, and somebody had even provided him with the four stars of
his retirement rank. He was, again, the man Conn had seen in the
dome-house on Luna.

"Well, you got it open," he said, climbing down from the airjeep that
had brought him. "Now, what are you going to do with it?"

"We can't make up our minds," Conn said. "We're going to let the
computer tell us what to do with it."

Shanlee looked at him, startled. "You mean, you're going to have
Merlin judge itself and decide its own fate?" he asked. "You'll get
the same result we did."

They let a ladder down the hole and descended--Conn and his father,
Kurt Fawzi, Jerry Rivas, then Shanlee and his two guards, then
others--until a score of them were crowded in the room at the bottom,
their flashlights illuminating the circular chamber, revealing
ceiling-high metal cabinets, banks of button- and dial-studded control
panels, big keyboards. It was Shanlee who found the lights and put
them on.

"Powered from the central plant, down below," he said. "The main
cables are disguised as the grounding-outlet. If this thing had been
on when you put on the power, you'd have had an awful lot of power
going nowhere, apparently."

Rodney Maxwell was disappointed. "I know this stuff looks awfully
complex, but I'd have expected there to be more of it."

"Oh, I didn't get a chance to tell you about that. This is only the
operating end," Conn said, and then asked Shanlee if there were
inspection-screens. When Shanlee indicated them, he began putting them
on. "This is the real computer."

They all gave the same view, with minor differences--long corridors,
ten feet wide, between solid banks of steel cabinets on either side.
Conn explained where they were, and added:

"Kurt and the rest of them were sitting here, all this time, wondering
where Merlin was; it was all around them."

"Well, how did you get up here?" Fawzi asked. "We couldn't find
anything from below."

"No, you couldn't." Shanlee was amused. "Watch this."

It was so simple that nobody had ever guessed it. Below, back of the
Commander-in-chief's office, there was a closet, fifteen feet by
twenty. They had found it empty except for some bits of discarded
office-gear, and had used it as a catch-all for everything they wanted
out of the way. Shanlee went to where four thick steel columns rose
from floor to ceiling in a rectangle around a heavy-duty lifter,
pressing a button on a control-box on one of them. The lifter, and the
floor under it, rose, with a thick mass of vitrified rock underneath.
The closet, full of the junk that had been thrown into it, followed.

"That's it," he said. "We just tore out the controls inside that and
patched it up a little. There's a sheet of collapsium-plate under the
floor. Your scanners simply couldn't detect anything from below."

Confident that Merlin would decree its own destruction, Shanlee gave
his parole; the others accepted it. The newsmen were admitted to the
circular operating room and encouraged to send out views and
descriptions of everything. Then the lift controls were reinstalled,
the lid was put back on top, and the only access to the room was
through the office below. The entrance to this was always guarded by
Zarel's soldiers or Brangwyn's police.

There were only a score of them who could be let in on the actual
facts. For the most part, they were the same men who had been in
Fawzi's office on the afternoon of Conn's return, a year and a half
ago. A few others--Anse Dawes, Jerry Rivas, and five computermen Conn
had trained on Koshchei--had to be trusted. Conn insisted on letting
Sylvie Jacquemont in on the revised Awful Truth About Merlin. They
spent a lot of their time together, in Travis's office, for the most
part sunk in dejection.

They had finally found Merlin; now they must lose it. They were trying
to reconcile themselves and take comfort from the achievement, empty
as it was. They could see no way out. If Merlin said that Merlin had
to be destroyed, that was it. Merlin was infallible. Conn hated the
thought of destroying that machine with his whole being, not because
it was an infallible oracle, but because it was the climactic
masterpiece of the science he had spent years studying. To destroy it
was an even worse sacrilege to him than it was to the Merlinolators.
And Rodney Maxwell was thinking of the public effects. What the Travis
statement had started would be nothing by comparison.

"You know, we can keep the destruction of Merlin a secret," Conn said.
"It'll take some work down at the power plant, but we can overload all
the circuits and burn everything out at once." He turned to Shanlee.
"I don't know why you people didn't think of that."

Shanlee looked at him in surprise. "Why, now that you mention it,
neither do I," he admitted. "We just didn't."

"Then," Conn continued, "we can tinker up something in the operating
room that'll turn out what will look like computation results. As far
as anybody outside ourselves will know, Merlin will still be solving
everybody's problems. We'll do like any fortuneteller; tell the
customer what he wants to believe and keep him happy."

More lies; lies without end. And now he'd have a machine to do his
lying for him, a dummy computer that wouldn't compute anything. And
all he'd wanted, to begin with, had been a ship to haul some brandy to
where they could get a fair price for it.

Peace had returned. At first, it had been a frightened and uneasy
peace. The bluff--he hoped that was what it had been--by the Koshchei
colonists had shocked everybody into momentary inaction. In the
twenty-four hours that had followed, the forces of sanity and order
had gotten control again. Merlin existed and had been found. As for
Travis's statement, the old general had been bound by a wartime oath
of secrecy to deny Merlin's existence. The majority relaxed, ashamed
of their hysterical reaction. As for the Cybernarchists and
Armageddonists and Human Supremacy Leaguers, government and private
police, vastly augmented by volunteers, speedily rounded up the
leaders; their followers dispersed, realizing that Merlin was nothing
but a lot of dials and buttons, and interestedly watching the
broadcast views of it.

The banks were still closed, but discreet back-door withdrawals were
permitted to keep business going; so was the Stock Exchange, but word
was going around the brokerage offices that Trisystem Investments was
in the market for a long list of securities. Nobody was willing to do
anything that might upset the precarious balance; everybody was
talking about the bright future, when Merlin would guide Poictesme to
ever greater and more splendid prosperity.

Conn's father and sister flew to Litchfield; Flora stayed with her
mother, and Rodney Maxwell returned to Force Command, shaking his head
gravely.

"She's still unconscious, Conn," he said. "She just lies there, barely
breathing. The doctors don't know.... I wish Wade hadn't gone on the
ship."

The price of what he had wanted to do was becoming unendurably high
for Conn.

They ran off the computations Merlin had made forty years before, and
rechecked them. There had been no error. The Terran Federation,
overextended, had been cracking for a century before the War; the
strain of that conflict had started an irreversible breakup. Two
centuries for the Federation as such; at most, another century of
irregular trade and occasional war between independent planets, Galaxy
full of human-populated planets as poor as Poictesme at its worst. Or,
aware of the future, sudden outbursts of desperate violence, then
anarchy and barbarism.

It took a long time to set up the new computation. Forty years
of history for almost five hundred planets had to be abstracted
and summarized and translated from verbal symbols to the
electro-mathematical language of computers and fed in. Conn and Sylvie
and General Shanlee and the three men and two women Conn had taught on
Koshchei worked and rested briefly and worked again. Finally, it was
finished.

"General; you're the oldest Merlin hand," Conn said, gesturing to the
red button at the main control panel, "You do it."

"You do it, Conn. None of us would be here except for you."

"Thank you, General."

He pressed the button. They all stood silently watching the output
slot.

Even a positronic computer does not work instantaneously. Nothing
does. Conn took his eyes from the slot from which the tape would come,
and watched the second-hand of the clock above it. The wait didn't
seem like hours to him; it only seemed like seventy-five seconds, that
way. Then the bell rang, and the tape began coming out.

It took another hour and a half of button-punching; the Braille-like
symbols on the tape had to be retranslated, and even Merlin couldn't
do that for itself. Merlin didn't think in human terms.

It was the same as before. In ignorance, the peoples of the Federation
worlds would go on, striving to keep things running until they wore
out, and then sinking into apathetic acceptance. Deprived of hope,
they would turn to frantic violence and smash everything they most
wanted to preserve. Conn pushed another button.

The second information-request went in: _What is the best course to be
followed under these conditions by the people of Poictesme?_ It had
taken some time to phrase that in symbols a computer would find
comprehensible; the answer, at great length, emerged in two minutes
eight seconds. Retranslating it took five hours.

In the beginning and for the first ten years, it was, almost item for
item, the Maxwell Plan. Export trade, specialized in luxury goods.
Brandies and wines, tobacco; a long list of other exportable
commodities, and optimum markets. Reopening of industrial plants;
establishment of new industries. Attainment of economic
self-sufficiency. Cultural self-sufficiency; establishment of
universities, institutes of technology, research laboratories. Then
the Maxwell Plan became the Merlin Plan; the breakup of the Federation
was a fact that entered into the computation. Build-up of military
strength to resist aggression by other planetary governments. Defense
of the Gartner Trisystem. Lists of possible aggressor planets. Revival
of interstellar communications and trade; expeditions, conquest and
re-education of natives....

"We can't begin to handle this without Merlin," Conn said. "If that
means blowing up the Federation, let it blow. We'll start a new one
here."

"No; if there's a general, violent collapse of the Federation, it'll
spread to Poictesme," Shanlee told him. "Let's ask Merlin the big
question."

Merlin took a good five minutes to work that one out. The question had
to include a full description of Merlin, and a statement of the
information which must be kept secret. The answer was even more
lengthy, but it was summed up in the first word: _Falsification_.

"So Merlin's got to be a liar, too, along with the rest of us!" Sylvie
cried. "Conn, you've corrupted his morals!"

The rest of it was false data which must be taped in, and lists of
corrections which must be made in evaluating any computation into
which such data might enter. There was also a statement that, after
fifty years, suppression of the truth and circulation of falsely
optimistic statements about the Federation would no longer have any
importance.

"Well, that's it," Conn said. "Merlin thought himself out of a death
sentence."

They crowded into the lift and went down to the office below.
Everybody who knew what had been going on upstairs was there. Most of
them were nursing drinks; almost everybody was smoking. All of them
were silent, until Judge Ledue took his cigar from his mouth.

"Has the jury reached a verdict?" he asked, clinging with courtroom
formality to his self-control.

"Yes, your Honor. We find the defendant, Merlin, not guilty as
charged."

In the uproar his words released, Rodney Maxwell got to his feet and
came quickly to Conn.

"Flora called just a while ago. Your mother is conscious; she's asking
for us. Flora says she seems perfectly normal."

"We'll go right away; take a recon-car. General, will you explain
things till I get back? Sylvie, do you want to come with us?"




XXII


It was autumn again, the second autumn since he had landed from the
_City of Asgard_ at Storisende and taken the _Countess Dorothy_ home
to Litchfield. Again the fields were bare and brown; all up and down
the Gordon Valley the melons were harvested, and the wine-pressing was
ready to start.

The house was crowded today. All top-level Litchfield seemed to have
turned out, and there were guests from Storisende, and even a few who
had made the trip from Koshchei to be there, Simon Macquarte, the
president of Koshchei Tech; Conn would always remember him in the
screen threatening a whole planet with devastation. Luther Chen-Wong,
the chief executive of Koshchei Colony. Clyde Nichols, the president
of Koshchei Airlines.

He almost bumped into Yves Jacquemont, coming in from the hall.
Jacquemont's beard had been trimmed down to a small imperial, and he
was wearing the uniform of Trisystem & Interstellar Spacelines,
nothing at all like a Federation Space Navy uniform. He was laughing
about something; he threw an arm over Conn's shoulder, and they went
into the front parlor together.

"Oh, Gehenna of a big crop!" he heard Klem Zareff's voice, chuckling
happily, above the babble in the room. "You wouldn't believe it. Why,
we had to build six new vats...."

The thin-faced, white-haired man in the chair beside him said
something. Mike Shanlee and Klem Zareff, old enemies, were now fast
friends. Shanlee had come in from Force Command with Conn that
morning. He had stayed on Poictesme as nominal head of Project Merlin,
and intended to remain there for the rest of his life.

"Oh, there aren't any more farm-tramps," Zareff replied. "Everybody's
getting factory jobs off-planet. I have an awful time getting help,
and what I can get won't work for less than ten sols a day. Why,
they're even organizing a union...."

There were feminine shrieks from across the room, and a stampede. The
housecleaning-robot had come in, running its vacuum-cleaning hose
around and brandishing its mops. He saw his mother break away from a
group of older ladies and shout:

"_Oscar!_"

The robot stopped dead. "Yash'm?" a voice came out of it,
Sheshan-accented.

"Go out!" his mother commanded. "Go to kitchen. Stay there."

"Yash'm." The robot floated out the door to the hall.

His mother rejoined her friends. Probably telling them, for the
thousandth time, that her boy Conn fixed up the sound receptors and
voice for Oscar. Or harping on how Conn had been telling everybody the
truth, all along, and people wouldn't believe him.

Sylvie came up to him and caught his arm. "Come on, Conn; they're
going to start the rehearsal," she said.

"They've been going to start it for an hour," her father told her.

"Well, they're really going to start it now."

"All right. You two run along," Yves Jacquemont said. "And you'd
better start rehearsing for your own wedding before long. The _Genji_
will be ready to hyper out in another month, and I don't want to be at
space when my only daughter gets married."

They pushed through the crowd, dragging Conn's mother with them toward
the big living room beyond. On the way, Mrs. Maxwell stopped to try to
drag Judge Ledue out of a chair.

"Judge, the rehearsal is starting; they can't do it without you."

Ledue clung to his chair. "They daren't do it with me, Mrs. Maxwell.
If I get into it, it won't be a rehearsal; they'll be really married,
and then there won't be any point in having a wedding tomorrow."

"Oh, Morgan!" Conn called across the room to Gatworth. "You've just
been appointed temporary judge for the wedding rehearsal!"

There was a big crowd around Wade Lucas, in the next room; he was
telling them about the voyage to Baldur, from which he had returned,
and the one to Irminsul, with a cargo of arms, machine tools and
contragravity vehicles, on which he and his bride would go for their
honeymoon. There was another crowd around Flora; she was telling them
about the new fashions on Baldur, which had been brought back on the
_Ouroboros II_.

"Where's your father?" his mother was asking him. "He has to rehearse
giving the bride away."

"Probably in his office. I'll go get him."

"You'll get into an argument with somebody and forget to come back,"
his mother said. "Sylvie, you go with him, and bring both of them
back."

"When'll we have our wedding, Sylvie?" he asked as they went off
together.

"Well, before Dad goes to Aditya with the _Genji_. That'll have to be
in a month."

"Two weeks? That ought to be plenty of time to get ready, and let
people recover from this one."

"Everybody's here now. Let's make it a double wedding tomorrow," she
suggested.

He hadn't been prepared for that. "Well, I hadn't expected.... Sure!
Good idea!" he agreed.

There was a crowd in Rodney Maxwell's little office--Fawzi and some
others, and some Storisende people. One of the latter was
vociferating:

"Jake Vyckhoven's no good, and he never was any good!"

"Well, you have to admit, if he hadn't ordered the banks and the Stock
Exchange closed that time, we'd have had a horrible panic--"

"Admit nothing of the kind! Jethro, you were there, you'll bear me
out. About a dozen of us were at Executive Palace for hours, bullying
him into that. Why, we almost had to twist one of his arms while he
was signing the order with the other. And now he has the gall to run
for re-election on the strength of his heroic actions at the time of
the Travis Hoax!"

"I know who we want for President!" another Storisende man exclaimed.
"He's right here in this room!"

"Yes!" Rodney Maxwell almost bellowed, before the other man could say
anything else. "Here he is!" He grabbed Kurt Fawzi by the arm and
yanked him to his feet. "Here's the man most responsible for finding
Merlin; the man who first suggested sending my son Conn to Terra to
school, the man who, more than anyone else, devoted his life to the
search for Merlin, the man whose inextinguishable faith and
indomitable courage kept that search alive through its darkest hours.
Everybody, get a drink; a toast to our next President, Kurt Fawzi!"

Conn was sure he heard his father add: "Ghu, what a narrow escape!"

Then he and Sylvie began chanting, in unison, "_We want Fawzi! We want
Fawzi!_"



If you enjoyed this novel, you will also want to read:

SPACE VIKING
by
H. BEAM PIPER


After a galaxy-wide war had left the planetary federation in ruins,
every surviving civilized world was on its own. And that was a perfect
setup for the marauders from the far-out rim.

Trask was one of those dreaded Space Vikings, a warrior spaceman with
a crew and a ship that struck terror to a thousand worlds. But Trask
had a special personal interest In scourging the stars--he wanted to
draw upon himself the fire of a certain enemy--a renegade
planet-wrecker with a yen for galactic empire building.

Ace Book F-225 40 cent

Available at this price (plus 5 cent handling fee) from Ace Books, Inc.
(Dept. MM), 1120 Avenue of the Americas, New York, N.Y. 10036

Here's a quick checklist of recent releases of

ACE SCIENCE-FICTION BOOKS

40 cent


F-231 STAR GATE by Andre Norton

F-236 THE TIME TRADERS by Andre Norton

F-237 THE SHIP FROM OUTSIDE by A. Bertram Chandler
_and_ BEYOND THE GALACTIC RIM by A. Bertram Chandler

F-239 TIME AND AGAIN by Clifford D. Simak

F-240 WHEN THE SLEEPER WAKES by H. G. Wells

F-241 STAR BRIDGE by Jack Williamson and J. Gunn

F-242 THE RITES OF OHE by John Brunner
_and_ CASTAWAYS' WORLD by John Brunner

F-243 LORD OF THUNDER by Andre Norton

F-246 METROPOLIS by Thea von Harbou

F-248  BEYOND THE STARS by Ray Cummings

F-249 THE HAND OF ZEI by L. Sprague de Camp
_and_ THE SEARCH FOR ZEI by L. Sprague de Camp

F-251 THE GAME-PLAYERS OF TITAN by Philip K. Dick

F-253 ONE OF OUR ASTEROIDS IS MISSING by Calvin M. Knox
_and_ THE TWISTED MEN by A. E. van Vogt

F-255 THE PRODIGAL SUN by Philip E. High

F-257 ALIEN PLANET by Fletcher Pratt

F-259 PRINCE OF PERIL by Otis Adelbert Kline

F-261 THE TOWERS OF TORON by Samuel R. Delany
_and_ THE LUNAR EYE by Robt. M. Williams

F-263 WEB OF THE WITCH WORLD by Andre Norton


If you are missing any of these, they can be obtained directly from
the publisher by sending the indicated sum, plus 5 cent handling fee, to
Ace Books, Inc. (Dept. M M), 1120 Avenue of the Americas, New York,
N.Y. 10036

"Is there really a Merlin?"

Everybody on the war-torn planet Poictesme believed it existed. And
they all believed that when this super-gigantic computer was located
amid the mountains of surplus equipment that was the planet's sole
source of revenue, it would mean Utopia for everyone.

Conn Maxwell knew different. He had studied the records on Earth and
he thought he knew the true facts about this cosmic computer. To tell
them would be to panic Poictesme, so instead he set about a new search
in his own way--with startling results.

H. Beam Piper, author of SPACE VIKING, has again produced an original
and unusual novel of the space future.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Cosmic Computer, by Henry Beam Piper

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COSMIC COMPUTER ***

***** This file should be named 20727.txt or 20727.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/7/2/20727/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Bethanne M. Simms, Jason Isbell, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg EBook of The 64-Square Madhouse, by Fritz Leiber

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll
have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using
this ebook.



Title: The 64-Square Madhouse

Author: Fritz Leiber

Release Date: January 21, 2020 [EBook #61213]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE 64-SQUARE MADHOUSE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                        THE 64-SQUARE MADHOUSE

                            by FRITZ LEIBER

                    The machine was not perfect. It
                    could be tricked. It could make
                    mistakes. And--it could learn!

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                Worlds of If Science Fiction, May 1962.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


Silently, so as not to shock anyone with illusions about well dressed
young women, Sandra Lea Grayling cursed the day she had persuaded the
_Chicago Space Mirror_ that there would be all sorts of human interest
stories to be picked up at the first international grandmaster chess
tournament in which an electronic computing machine was entered.

Not that there weren't enough humans around, it was the interest that
was in doubt. The large hall was crammed with energetic dark-suited
men of whom a disproportionately large number were bald, wore glasses,
were faintly untidy and indefinably shabby, had Slavic or Scandinavian
features, and talked foreign languages.

They yakked interminably. The only ones who didn't were scurrying
individuals with the eager-zombie look of officials.

Chess sets were everywhere--big ones on tables, still bigger
diagram-type electric ones on walls, small peg-in sets dragged from
side pockets and manipulated rapidly as part of the conversational
ritual and still smaller folding sets in which the pieces were the tiny
magnetized disks used for playing in free-fall.

There were signs featuring largely mysterious combinations of letters:
FIDE, WBM, USCF, USSF, USSR and UNESCO. Sandra felt fairly sure about
the last three.

The many clocks, bedside table size, would have struck a familiar
note except that they had little red flags and wheels sprinkled over
their faces and they were all in pairs, two clocks to a case. That
Siamese-twin clocks should be essential to a chess tournament struck
Sandra as a particularly maddening circumstance.

       *       *       *       *       *

Her last assignment had been to interview the pilot pair riding the
first American manned circum-lunar satellite--and the five alternate
pairs who hadn't made the flight. This tournament hall seemed to Sandra
much further out of the world.

Overheard scraps of conversation in reasonably intelligible English
were not particularly helpful. Samples:

"They say the Machine has been programmed to play nothing but pure
Barcza System and Indian Defenses--and the Dragon Formation if anyone
pushes the King Pawn."

"Hah! In that case...."

"The Russians have come with ten trunkfuls of prepared variations and
they'll gang up on the Machine at adjournments. What can one New Jersey
computer do against four Russian grandmasters?"

"I heard the Russians have been programmed--with hypnotic cramming and
somno-briefing. Votbinnik had a nervous breakdown."

"Why, the Machine hasn't even a _Haupturnier_ or an intercollegiate
won. It'll over its head be playing."

"Yes, but maybe like Capa at San Sebastian or Morphy or Willie Angler
at New York. The Russians will look like potzers."

"Have you studied the scores of the match between Moon Base and
Circum-Terra?"

"Not worth the trouble. The play was feeble. Barely Expert Rating."

Sandra's chief difficulty was that she knew absolutely nothing about
the game of chess--a point that she had slid over in conferring with
the powers at the _Space Mirror_, but that now had begun to weigh on
her. How wonderful it would be, she dreamed, to walk out this minute,
find a quiet bar and get pie-eyed in an evil, ladylike way.

"Perhaps mademoiselle would welcome a drink?"

"You're durn tootin' she would!" Sandra replied in a rush, and then
looked down apprehensively at the person who had read her thoughts.

It was a small sprightly elderly man who looked like a somewhat
thinned down Peter Lorre--there was that same impression of the happy
Slavic elf. What was left of his white hair was cut very short,
making a silvery nap. His pince-nez had quite thick lenses. But in
sharp contrast to the somberly clad men around them, he was wearing
a pearl-gray suit of almost exactly the same shade as Sandra's--a
circumstance that created for her the illusion that they were fellow
conspirators.

"Hey, wait a minute," she protested just the same. He had already taken
her arm and was piloting her toward the nearest flight of low wide
stairs. "How did you know I wanted a drink?"

"I could see that mademoiselle was having difficulty swallowing," he
replied, keeping them moving. "Pardon me for feasting my eyes on your
lovely throat."

"I didn't suppose they'd serve drinks here."

"But of course." They were already mounting the stairs. "What would
chess be without coffee or schnapps?"

"Okay, lead on," Sandra said. "You're the doctor."

"Doctor?" He smiled widely. "You know, I like being called that."

"Then the name is yours as long as you want it--Doc."

       *       *       *       *       *

Meanwhile the happy little man had edged them into the first of a small
cluster of tables, where a dark-suited jabbering trio was just rising.
He snapped his fingers and hissed through his teeth. A white-aproned
waiter materialized.

"For myself black coffee," he said. "For mademoiselle rhine wine and
seltzer?"

"That'd go fine." Sandra leaned back. "Confidentially, Doc, I was
having trouble swallowing ... well, just about everything here."

He nodded. "You are not the first to be shocked and horrified by
chess," he assured her. "It is a curse of the intellect. It is a game
for lunatics--or else it creates them. But what brings a sane and
beautiful young lady to this 64-square madhouse?"

Sandra briefly told him her story and her predicament. By the time they
were served, Doc had absorbed the one and assessed the other.

"You have one great advantage," he told her. "You know nothing
whatsoever of chess--so you will be able to write about it
understandably for your readers." He swallowed half his demitasse and
smacked his lips. "As for the Machine--you _do_ know, I suppose, that
it is not a humanoid metal robot, walking about clanking and squeaking
like a late medieval knight in armor?"

"Yes, Doc, but...." Sandra found difficulty in phrasing the question.

"Wait." He lifted a finger. "I think I know what you're going to ask.
You want to know why, if the Machine works at all, it doesn't work
perfectly, so that it always wins and there is no contest. Right?"

Sandra grinned and nodded. Doc's ability to interpret her mind was as
comforting as the bubbly, mildly astringent mixture she was sipping.

He removed his pince-nez, massaged the bridge of his nose and replaced
them.

"If you had," he said, "a billion computers all as fast as the Machine,
it would take them all the time there ever will be in the universe just
to play through all the possible games of chess, not to mention the
time needed to classify those games into branching families of wins for
White, wins for Black and draws, and the additional time required to
trace out chains of key-moves leading always to wins. So the Machine
can't play chess like God. What the Machine can do is examine all the
likely lines of play for about eight moves ahead--that is, four moves
each for White and Black--and then decide which is the best move on the
basis of capturing enemy pieces, working toward checkmate, establishing
a powerful central position and so on."

       *       *       *       *       *

"That sounds like the way a man would play a game," Sandra observed.
"Look ahead a little way and try to make a plan. You know, like getting
out trumps in bridge or setting up a finesse."

"Exactly!" Doc beamed at her approvingly. "The Machine _is_ like a
man. A rather peculiar and not exactly pleasant man. A man who always
abides by sound principles, who is utterly incapable of flights of
genius, but who never makes a mistake. You see, you are finding human
interest already, even in the Machine."

Sandra nodded. "Does a human chess player--a grandmaster, I mean--ever
look eight moves ahead in a game?"

"Most assuredly he does! In crucial situations, say where there's a
chance of winning at once by trapping the enemy king, he examines
many more moves ahead than that--thirty or forty even. The Machine
is probably programmed to recognize such situations and do something
of the same sort, though we can't be sure from the information World
Business Machines has released. But in most chess positions the
possibilities are so very nearly unlimited that even a grandmaster can
only look a very few moves ahead and must rely on his judgment and
experience and artistry. The equivalent of those in the Machine is the
directions fed into it before it plays a game."

"You mean the programming?"

"Indeed yes! The programming is the crux of the problem of the
chess-playing computer. The first practical model, reported by
Bernstein and Roberts of IBM in 1958 and which looked four moves
ahead, was programmed so that it had a greedy worried tendency to grab
at enemy pieces and to retreat its own whenever they were attacked. It
had a personality like that of a certain kind of chess-playing dub--a
dull-brained woodpusher afraid to take the slightest risk of losing
material--but a dub who could almost always beat an utter novice.
The WBM machine here in the hall operates about a million times as
fast. Don't ask me how, I'm no physicist, but it depends on the new
transistors and something they call hypervelocity, which in turn
depends on keeping parts of the Machine at a temperature near absolute
zero. However, the result is that the Machine can see eight moves ahead
and is capable of being programmed much more craftily."

"A million times as fast as the first machine, you say, Doc? And yet it
only sees twice as many moves ahead?" Sandra objected.

"There is a geometrical progression involved there," he told her
with a smile. "Believe me, eight moves ahead is a lot of moves when
you remember that the Machine is errorlessly examining every one of
thousands of variations. Flesh-and-blood chess masters have lost games
by blunders they could have avoided by looking only one or two moves
ahead. The Machine will make no such oversights. Once again, you see,
you have the human factor, in this case working for the Machine."

"Savilly, I have been looking allplace for you!"

A stocky, bull-faced man with a great bristling shock of black,
gray-flecked hair had halted abruptly by their table. He bent over Doc
and began to whisper explosively in a guttural foreign tongue.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sandra's gaze traveled beyond the balustrade. Now that she could look
down at it, the central hall seemed less confusedly crowded. In the
middle, toward the far end, were five small tables spaced rather widely
apart and with a chessboard and men and one of the Siamese clocks set
out on each. To either side of the hall were tiers of temporary seats,
about half of them occupied. There were at least as many more people
still wandering about.

On the far wall was a big electric scoreboard and also, above the
corresponding tables, five large dully glassy chessboards, the White
squares in light gray, the Black squares in dark.

One of the five wall chessboards was considerably larger than the other
four--the one above the Machine.

Sandra looked with quickening interest at the console of the Machine--a
bank of keys and some half-dozen panels of rows and rows of tiny
telltale lights, all dark at the moment. A thick red velvet cord on
little brass standards ran around the Machine at a distance of about
ten feet. Inside the cord were only a few gray-smocked men. Two of
them had just laid a black cable to the nearest chess table and were
attaching it to the Siamese clock.

Sandra tried to think of a being who always checked everything, but
only within limits beyond which his thoughts never ventured, and who
never made a mistake....

"Miss Grayling! May I present to you Igor Jandorf."

She turned back quickly with a smile and a nod.

"I should tell you, Igor," Doc continued, "that Miss Grayling
represents a large and influential Midwestern newspaper. Perhaps you
have a message for her readers."

The shock-headed man's eyes flashed. "I most certainly do!" At that
moment the waiter arrived with a second coffee and wine-and-seltzer.
Jandorf seized Doc's new demitasse, drained it, set it back on the tray
with a flourish and drew himself up.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Tell your readers, Miss Grayling," he proclaimed, fiercely arching his
eyebrows at her and actually slapping his chest, "that I, Igor Jandorf,
will defeat the Machine by the living force of my human personality!
Already I have offered to play it an informal game blindfold--I, who
have played 50 blindfold games simultaneously! Its owners refuse me. I
have challenged it also to a few games of rapid-transit--an offer no
true grandmaster would dare ignore. Again they refuse me. I predict
that the Machine will play like a great oaf--at least against _me_.
Repeat: I, Igor Jandorf, by the living force of my human personality,
will defeat the Machine. Do you have that? You can remember it?"

"Oh yes," Sandra assured him, "but there are some other questions I
very much want to ask you, Mr. Jandorf."

"I am sorry, Miss Grayling, but I must clear my mind now. In ten
minutes they start the clocks."

While Sandra arranged for an interview with Jandorf after the day's
playing session, Doc reordered his coffee.

"One expects it of Jandorf," he explained to Sandra with a philosophic
shrug when the shock-headed man was gone. "At least he didn't take your
wine-and-seltzer. Or did he? One tip I have for you: don't call a chess
master Mister, call him Master. They all eat it up."

"Gee, Doc, I don't know how to thank you for everything. I hope I
haven't offended Mis--Master Jandorf so that he doesn't--"

"Don't worry about that. Wild horses couldn't keep Jandorf away from a
press interview. You know, his rapid-transit challenge was cunning.
That's a minor variety of chess where each player gets only ten seconds
to make a move. Which I don't suppose would give the Machine time to
look three moves ahead. Chess players would say that the Machine has a
very slow sight of the board. This tournament is being played at the
usual international rate of 15 moves an hour, and--"

"Is that why they've got all those crazy clocks?" Sandra interrupted.

"Oh, yes. Chess clocks measure the time each player takes in making his
moves. When a player makes a move he presses a button that shuts his
clock off and turns his opponent's on. If a player uses too much time,
he loses as surely as if he were checkmated. Now since the Machine
will almost certainly be programmed to take an equal amount of time
on successive moves, a rate of 15 moves an hour means it will have 4
minutes a move--and it will need every second of them! Incidentally
it was typical Jandorf bravado to make a point of a blindfold
challenge--just as if the Machine weren't playing blindfold itself. Or
_is_ the Machine blindfold? How do you think of it?"

"Gosh, I don't know. Say, Doc, is it really true that Master Jandorf
has played 50 games at once blindfolded? I can't believe that."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Of course not!" Doc assured her. "It was only 49 and he lost two of
those and drew five. Jandorf always exaggerates. It's in his blood."

"He's one of the Russians, isn't he?" Sandra asked. "Igor?"

Doc chuckled. "Not exactly," he said gently. "He is originally a Pole
and now he has Argentinian citizenship. You have a program, don't you?"

Sandra started to hunt through her pocketbook, but just then two lists
of names lit up on the big electric scoreboard.

          THE PLAYERS

    William Angler, USA
    Bela Grabo, Hungary
    Ivan Jal, USSR
    Igor Jandorf, Argentina
    Dr. S. Krakatower, France
    Vassily Lysmov, USSR
    The  Machine,  USA  (programmed by Simon Great)
    Maxim Serek, USSR
    Moses Sherevsky, USA
    Mikhail Votbinnik, USSR
    _Tournament Director_: Dr. Jan Vanderhoef

    FIRST ROUND PAIRINGS

    Sherevsky vs. Serek
    Jal vs. Angler
    Jandorf vs. Votbinnik
    Lysmov vs. Krakatower
    Grabo vs. Machine

"Cripes, Doc, they all sound like they were Russians," Sandra said
after a bit. "Except this Willie Angler. Oh, he's the boy wonder,
isn't he?"

Doc nodded. "Not such a boy any longer, though. He's.... Well, speak of
the Devil's children.... Miss Grayling, I have the honor of presenting
to you the only grandmaster ever to have been ex-chess-champion of the
United States while still technically a minor--Master William Augustus
Angler."

A tall, sharply-dressed young man with a hatchet face pressed the old
man back into his chair.

"How are you, Savvy, old boy old boy?" he demanded. "Still chasing the
girls, I see."

"Please, Willie, get off me."

"Can't take it, huh?" Angler straightened up somewhat. "Hey waiter!
Where's that chocolate malt? I don't want it _next_ year. About that
_ex-_, though. I was swindled, Savvy. I was robbed."

"Willie!" Doc said with some asperity. "Miss Grayling is a journalist.
She would like to have a statement from you as to how you will play
against the Machine."

       *       *       *       *       *

Angler grinned and shook his head sadly. "Poor old Machine," he said.
"I don't know why they take so much trouble polishing up that pile of
tin just so that I can give it a hit in the head. I got a hatful of
moves it'll burn out all its tubes trying to answer. And if it gets too
fresh, how about you and me giving its low-temperature section the
hotfoot, Savvy? The money WBM's putting up is okay, though. That first
prize will just fit the big hole in my bank account."

"I know you haven't the time now, Master Angler," Sandra said rapidly,
"but if after the playing session you could grant me--"

"Sorry, babe," Angler broke in with a wave of dismissal. "I'm dated up
for two months in advance. Waiter! I'm here, not there!" And he went
charging off.

Doc and Sandra looked at each other and smiled.

"Chess masters aren't exactly humble people, are they?" she said.

Doc's smile became tinged with sad understanding. "You must excuse
them, though," he said. "They really get so little recognition or
recompense. This tournament is an exception. And it takes a great deal
of ego to play greatly."

"I suppose so. So World Business Machines is responsible for this
tournament?"

"Correct. Their advertising department is interested in the prestige.
They want to score a point over their great rival."

"But if the Machine plays badly it will be a black eye for them,"
Sandra pointed out.

"True," Doc agreed thoughtfully. "WBM must feel very sure.... It's
the prize money they've put up, of course, that's brought the world's
greatest players here. Otherwise half of them would be holding off
in the best temperamental-artist style. For chess players the prize
money is fabulous--$35,000, with $15,000 for first place, and all
expenses paid for all players. There's never been anything like it.
Soviet Russia is the only country that has ever supported and rewarded
her best chess players at all adequately. I think the Russian players
are here because UNESCO and FIDE (that's _Federation Internationale
des Echecs_--the international chess organization) are also backing
the tournament. And perhaps because the Kremlin is hungry for a little
prestige now that its space program is sagging."

"But if a Russian doesn't take first place it will be a black eye for
them."

Doc frowned. "True, in a sense. _They_ must feel very sure.... Here
they are now."

       *       *       *       *       *

Four men were crossing the center of the hall, which was clearing,
toward the tables at the other end. Doubtless they just happened to be
going two by two in close formation, but it gave Sandra the feeling of
a phalanx.

"The first two are Lysmov and Votbinnik," Doc told her. "It isn't often
that you see the current champion of the world--Votbinnik--and an
ex-champion arm in arm. There are two other persons in the tournament
who have held that honor--Jal and Vanderhoef the director, way back."

"Will whoever wins this tournament become champion?"

"Oh no. That's decided by two-player matches--a very long
business--after elimination tournaments between leading contenders.
This tournament is a round robin: each player plays one game with every
other player. That means nine rounds."

"Anyway there _are_ an awful lot of Russians in the tournament,"
Sandra said, consulting her program. "Four out of ten have USSR after
them. And Bela Grabo, Hungary--that's a satellite. And Sherevsky and
Krakatower are Russian-sounding names."

"The proportion of Soviet to American entries in the tournament
represents pretty fairly the general difference in playing strength
between the two countries," Doc said judiciously. "Chess mastery
moves from land to land with the years. Way back it was the Moslems
and the Hindus and Persians. Then Italy and Spain. A little over a
hundred years ago it was France and England. Then Germany, Austria
and the New World. Now it's Russia--including of course the Russians
who have run away from Russia. But don't think there aren't a lot of
good Anglo-Saxon types who are masters of the first water. In fact,
there are a lot of them here around us, though perhaps you don't
think so. It's just that if you play a lot of chess you get to looking
Russian. Once it probably made you look Italian. Do you see that short
bald-headed man?"

"You mean the one facing the Machine and talking to Jandorf?"

"Yes. Now that's one with a lot of human interest. Moses Sherevsky.
Been champion of the United States many times. A very strict Orthodox
Jew. Can't play chess on Fridays or on Saturdays before sundown." He
chuckled. "Why, there's even a story going around that one rabbi told
Sherevsky it would be unlawful for him to play against the Machine
because it is technically a _golem_--the clay Frankenstein's monster of
Hebrew legend."

Sandra asked, "What about Grabo and Krakatower?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Doc gave a short scornful laugh. "Krakatower! Don't pay any attention
to _him_. A senile has-been, it's a scandal he's been allowed to play
in this tournament! He must have pulled all sorts of strings. Told them
that his lifelong services to chess had won him the honor and that they
had to have a member of the so-called Old Guard. Maybe he even got down
on his knees and cried--and all the time his eyes on that expense money
and the last-place consolation prize! Yet dreaming schizophrenically
of beating them all! Please, don't get me started on Dirty Old
Krakatower."

"Take it easy, Doc. He sounds like he would make an interesting
article? Can you point him out to me?"

"You can tell him by his long white beard with coffee stains. I don't
see it anywhere, though. Perhaps he's shaved it off for the occasion.
It would be like that antique womanizer to develop senile delusions of
youthfulness."

"And Grabo?" Sandra pressed, suppressing a smile at the intensity of
Doc's animosity.

Doc's eyes grew thoughtful. "About Bela Grabo (why are three out of
four Hungarians named Bela?) I will tell you only this: That he is a
very brilliant player and that the Machine is very lucky to have drawn
him as its first opponent."

He would not amplify his statement. Sandra studied the Scoreboard again.

"This Simon Great who's down as programming the Machine. He's a famous
physicist, I suppose?"

"By no means. That was the trouble with some of the early chess-playing
machines--they were programmed by scientists. No, Simon Great is a
psychologist who at one time was a leading contender for the world's
chess championship. I think WBM was surprisingly shrewd to pick him
for the programming job. Let me tell you--No, better yet--"

Doc shot to his feet, stretched an arm on high and called out sharply,
"Simon!"

A man some four tables away waved back and a moment later came over.

"What is it, Savilly?" he asked. "There's hardly any time, you know."

       *       *       *       *       *

The newcomer was of middle height, compact of figure and feature, with
graying hair cut short and combed sharply back.

Doc spoke his piece for Sandra.

Simon Great smiled thinly. "Sorry," he said, "But I am making no
predictions and we are giving out no advance information on the
programming of the Machine. As you know, I have had to fight the
Players' Committee tooth and nail on all sorts of points about that
and they have won most of them. I am not permitted to re-program the
Machine at adjournments--only between games (I did insist on that and
get it!) And if the Machine breaks down during a game, its clock keeps
running on it. My men are permitted to make repairs--if they can work
fast enough."

"That makes it very tough on you," Sandra put in. "The Machine isn't
allowed any weaknesses."

Great nodded soberly. "And now I must go. They've almost finished the
count-down, as one of my technicians keeps on calling it. Very pleased
to have met you, Miss Grayling--I'll check with our PR man on that
interview. Be seeing you, Savvy."

The tiers of seats were filled now and the central space almost clear.
Officials were shooing off a few knots of lingerers. Several of the
grandmasters, including all four Russians, were seated at their tables.
Press and company cameras were flashing. The four smaller wallboards
lit up with the pieces in the opening position--white for White and red
for Black. Simon Great stepped over the red velvet cord and more flash
bulbs went off.

"You know, Doc," Sandra said, "I'm a dog to suggest this, but what
if this whole thing were a big fake? What if Simon Great were really
playing the Machine's moves? There would surely be some way for his
electricians to rig--"

Doc laughed happily--and so loudly that some people at the adjoining
tables frowned.

"Miss Grayling, that is a wonderful idea! I will probably steal it for
a short story. I still manage to write and place a few in England.
No, I do not think that is at all likely. WBM would never risk such
a fraud. Great is completely out of practice for actual tournament
play, though not for chess-thinking. The difference in style between
a computer and a man would be evident to any expert. Great's own style
is remembered and would be recognized--though, come to think of it, his
style was often described as being machinelike...." For a moment Doc's
eyes became thoughtful. Then he smiled again. "But no, the idea is
impossible. Vanderhoef as Tournament Director has played two or three
games with the Machine to assure himself that it operates legitimately
and has grandmaster skill."

"Did the Machine beat him?" Sandra asked.

       *       *       *       *       *

Doc shrugged. "The scores weren't released. It was very hush-hush.
But about your idea, Miss Grayling--did you ever read about Maelzel's
famous chess-playing automaton of the 19th Century? That one too was
supposed to work by machinery (cogs and gears, not electricity) but
actually it had a man hidden inside it--your Edgar Poe exposed the
fraud in a famous article. In _my_ story I think the chess robot will
break down while it is being demonstrated to a millionaire purchaser
and the young inventor will have to win its game for it to cover up
and swing the deal. Only the millionaire's daughter, who is really a
better player than either of them ... yes, yes! Your Ambrose Bierce
too wrote a story about a chess-playing robot of the clickety-clank-grr
kind who murdered his creator, crushing him like an iron grizzly bear
when the man won a game from him. Tell me, Miss Grayling, do you find
yourself imagining this Machine putting out angry tendrils to strangle
its opponents, or beaming rays of death and hypnotism at them? I can
imagine...."

While Doc chattered happily on about chess-playing robots and chess
stories, Sandra found herself thinking about him. A writer of some sort
evidently and a terrific chess buff. Perhaps he was an actual medical
doctor. She'd read something about two or three coming over with the
Russian squad. But Doc certainly didn't sound like a Soviet citizen.

He was older than she'd first assumed. She could see that now that
she was listening to him less and looking at him more. Tired, too.
Only his dark-circled eyes shone with unquenchable youth. A useful old
guy, whoever he was. An hour ago she'd been sure she was going to muff
this assignment completely and now she had it laid out cold. For the
umpteenth time in her career Sandra shied away from the guilty thought
that she wasn't a writer at all or even a reporter, she just used
dime-a-dozen female attractiveness to rope a susceptible man (young,
old, American, Russian) and pick his brain....

She realized suddenly that the whole hall had become very quiet.

Doc was the only person still talking and people were again looking at
them disapprovingly. All five wallboards were lit up and the changed
position of a few pieces showed that opening moves had been made on
four of them, including the Machine's. The central space between
the tiers of seats was completely clear now, except for one man
hurrying across it in their direction with the rapid yet quiet, almost
tip-toe walk that seemed to mark all the officials. _Like morticians'
assistants_, she thought. He rapidly mounted the stairs and halted at
the top to look around searchingly. His gaze lighted on their table,
his eyebrows went up, and he made a beeline for Doc. Sandra wondered if
she should warn him that he was about to be shushed.

The official laid a hand on Doc's shoulder. "Sir!" he said agitatedly.
"Do you realize that they've started your clock, Dr. Krakatower?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Sandra became aware that Doc was grinning at her. "Yes, it's true
enough, Miss Grayling," he said. "I trust you will pardon the
deception, though it was hardly one, even technically. Every word I
told you about Dirty Old Krakatower is literally true. Except the long
white beard--he never wore a beard after he was 35--that part was an
out-and-out lie! Yes, yes! I will be along in a moment! Do not worry,
the spectators will get their money's worth out of me! And WBM did not
with its expense account buy my soul--that belongs to the young lady
here."

Doc rose, lifted her hand and kissed it. "Thank you, mademoiselle,
for a charming interlude. I hope it will be repeated. Incidentally,
I should say that besides.... (Stop pulling at me, man!--there can't
be five minutes on my clock yet!) ... that besides being Dirty Old
Krakatower, grandmaster emeritus, I am also the special correspondent
of the _London Times_. It is always pleasant to chat with a colleague.
Please do not hesitate to use in your articles any of the ideas I
tossed out, if you find them worthy--I sent in my own first dispatch
two hours ago. Yes, yes, I come! Au revoir, mademoiselle!"

He was at the bottom of the stairs when Sandra jumped up and hurried to
the balustrade.

"Hey, Doc!" she called.

He turned.

"Good luck!" she shouted and waved.

He kissed his hand to her and went on.

People glared at her then and a horrified official came hurrying.
Sandra made big frightened eyes at him, but she couldn't quite hide
her grin.


                                  IV

Sitzfleisch (which roughly means endurance--"sitting flesh" or "buttock
meat") is the quality needed above all others by tournament chess
players--and their audiences.

After Sandra had watched the games (the players' faces, rather--she had
a really good pair of zoomer glasses) for a half hour or so, she had
gone to her hotel room, written her first article (interview with the
famous Dr. Krakatower), sent it in and then come back to the hall to
see how the games had turned out.

They were still going on, all five of them.

The press section was full, but two boys and a girl of high-school age
obligingly made room for Sandra on the top tier of seats and she tuned
in on their whispered conversation. The jargon was recognizably related
to that which she'd gotten a dose of on the floor, but gamier. Players
did not sacrifice pawns, they sacked them. No one was ever defeated,
only busted. Pieces weren't lost but blown. The Ruy Lopez was the Dirty
Old _Roo_ay--and incidentally a certain set of opening moves named
after a long-departed Spanish churchman, she now discovered from Dave,
Bill and Judy, whose sympathetic help she won by frequent loans of her
zoomer glasses.

The four-hour time control point--two hours and 30 moves for each
player--had been passed while she was sending in her article, she
learned, and they were well on their way toward the next control
point--an hour more and 15 moves for each player--after which
unfinished games would be adjourned and continued at a special morning
session. Sherevsky had had to make 15 moves in two minutes after taking
an hour earlier on just one move. But that was nothing out of the
ordinary, Dave had assured her in the same breath, Sherevsky was always
letting himself get into "fantastic time-pressure" and then wriggling
out of it brilliantly. He was apparently headed for a win over Serek.
_Score one for the USA over the USSR_, Sandra thought proudly.

Votbinnik had Jandorf practically in _Zugzwang_ (his pieces all tied
up, Bill explained) and the Argentinian would be busted shortly.
Through the glasses Sandra could see Jandorf's thick chest rise and
fall as he glared murderously at the board in front of him. By contrast
Votbinnik looked like a man lost in reverie.

Dr. Krakatower had lost a pawn to Lysmov but was hanging on grimly.
However, Dave would not give a plugged nickle for his chances against
the former world's champion, because "those old ones always weaken in
the sixth hour."

"You for-get the bio-logical mir-acle of Doc-tor Las-ker," Bill and
Judy chanted as one.

"Shut up," Dave warned them. An official glared angrily from the floor
and shook a finger. Much later Sandra discovered that Dr. Emanuel
Lasker was a philosopher-mathematician who, after holding the world's
championship for 26 years, had won a very strong tournament (New York
1924) at the age of 56 and later almost won another (Moscow 1935) at
the age of 67.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sandra studied Doc's face carefully through her glasses. He looked
terribly tired now, almost a death's head. Something tightened in her
chest and she looked away quickly.

The Angler-Jal and Grabo-Machine games were still ding-dong contests,
Dave told her. If anything, Grabo had a slight advantage. The Machine
was "on the move," meaning that Grabo had just made a move and was
waiting the automaton's reply.

The Hungarian was about the most restless "waiter" Sandra could
imagine. He twisted his long legs constantly and writhed his shoulders
and about every five seconds he ran his hands back through his unkempt
tassle of hair.

Once he yawned selfconsciously, straightened himself and sat very
compactly. But almost immediately he was writhing again.

The Machine had its own mannerisms, if you could call them that. Its
dim, unobtrusive telltale lights were winking on and off in a fairly
rapid, random pattern. Sandra got the impression that from time to time
Grabo's eyes were trying to follow their blinking, like a man watching
fireflies.

Simon Great sat impassively behind a bare table next to the Machine,
his five gray-smocked technicians grouped around him.

A flushed-faced, tall, distinguished-looking elderly gentleman was
standing by the Machine's console. Dave told Sandra it was Dr.
Vanderhoef, the Tournament Director, one-time champion of the world.

"Another old potzer like Krakatower, but with sense enough to know when
he's licked," Bill characterized harshly.

"Youth, ah, un-van-quish-able youth," Judy chanted happily by herself.
"Flashing like a meteor across the chess fir-ma-ment. Morphy, Angler,
Judy Kaplan...."

"Shut up! They really will throw us out," Dave warned her and then
explained in whispers to Sandra that Vanderhoef and his assistants had
the nervous-making job of feeding into the Machine the moves made by
its opponent, "so everyone will know it's on the level, I guess." He
added, "It means the Machine loses a few seconds every move, between
the time Grabo punches the clock and the time Vanderhoef gets the move
fed into the Machine."

Sandra nodded. The players were making it as hard on the Machine as
possible, she decided with a small rush of sympathy.

       *       *       *       *       *

Suddenly there was a tiny movement of the gadget attached from the
Machine to the clocks on Grabo's table and a faint _click_. But Grabo
almost leapt out of his skin.

Simultaneously a red castle-topped piece (one of the Machine's rooks,
Sandra was informed) moved four squares sideways on the big electric
board above the Machine. An official beside Dr. Vanderhoef went over to
Grabo's board and carefully moved the corresponding piece. Grabo seemed
about to make some complaint, then apparently thought better of it and
plunged into brooding cogitation over the board, elbows on the table,
both hands holding his head and fiercely massaging his scalp.

The Machine let loose with an unusually rapid flurry of blinking. Grabo
straightened up, seemed again about to make a complaint, then once
more to repress the impulse. Finally he moved a piece and punched his
clock. Dr. Vanderhoef immediately flipped four levers on the Machine's
console and Grabo's move appeared on the electric board.

Grabo sprang up, went over to the red velvet cord and motioned
agitatedly to Vanderhoef.

There was a short conference, inaudible at the distance, during which
Grabo waved his arms and Vanderhoef grew more flushed. Finally the
latter went over to Simon Great and said something, apparently with
some hesitancy. But Great smiled obligingly, sprang to his feet, and
in turn spoke to his technicians, who immediately fetched and unfolded
several large screens and set them in front of the Machine, masking the
blinking lights. _Blindfolding it_, Sandra found herself thinking.

Dave chuckled. "That's already happened once while you were out," he
told Sandra. "I guess seeing the lights blinking makes Grabo nervous.
But then _not_ seeing them makes him nervous. Just watch."

"The Machine has its own mysterious pow-wow-wers," Judy chanted.

"That's what you think," Bill told her. "Did you know that Willie
Angler has hired Evil Eye Bixel out of Brooklyn to put the whammy on
the Machine? S'fact."

"... pow-wow-wers unknown to mere mortals of flesh and blood--"

"Shut up!" Dave hissed. "Now you've done it. Here comes old Eagle Eye.
Look, I don't know you two. I'm with this lady here."

       *       *       *       *       *

Bela Grabo was suffering acute tortures. He had a winning attack,
he knew it. The Machine was counter-attacking, but unstrategically,
desperately, in the style of a Frank Marshall complicating the issue
and hoping for a swindle. All Grabo had to do, he knew, was keep his
head and _not blunder_--not throw away a queen, say, as he had to old
Vanderhoef at Brussels, or overlook a mate in two, as he had against
Sherevsky at Tel Aviv. The memory of those unutterably black moments
and a dozen more like them returned to haunt him. Never if he lived a
thousand years would he be free of them.

For the tenth time in the last two minutes he glanced at his clock.
He had fifteen minutes in which to make five moves. He wasn't in
time-pressure, he must remember that. He mustn't make a move on
impulse, he mustn't let his treacherous hand leap out without waiting
for instructions from its guiding brain.

First prize in this tournament meant incredible wealth--transportation
money and hotel bills for more than a score of future tournaments. But
more than that, it was one more chance to blazon before the world his
true superiority rather than the fading reputation of it. "... Bela
Grabo, brilliant but erratic...." Perhaps his last chance.

When, in the name of Heaven, was the Machine going to make its next
move? Surely it had already taken more than four minutes! But a glance
at its clock showed him that hardly half that time had gone by. He
decided he had made a mistake in asking again for the screens. It was
easier to watch those damned lights blink than have them blink in his
imagination.

Oh, if chess could only be played in intergalactic space, in the
black privacy of one's thoughts. But there had to be the physical
presence of the opponent with his (possibly deliberate) unnerving
mannerisms--Lasker and his cigar, Capablanca and his red neck-tie,
Nimzowitsch and his nervous contortions (very like Bela Grabo's, though
the latter did not see it that way). And now this ghastly flashing,
humming, stinking, button-banging metal monster!

Actually, he told himself, he was being asked to play two opponents,
the Machine and Simon Great, a sort of consultation team. It wasn't
fair!

       *       *       *       *       *

The Machine hammered its button and rammed its queen across the
electric board. In Grabo's imagination it was like an explosion.

Grabo held onto his nerves with an effort and plunged into a maze of
calculations.

Once he came to, like a man who has been asleep, to realize that he was
wondering whether the lights were still blinking behind the screens
while he was making his move. Did the Machine really analyze at such
times or were the lights just an empty trick? He forced his mind back
to the problems of the game, decided on his move, checked the board
twice for any violent move he might have missed, noted on his clock
that he'd taken five minutes, checked the board again very rapidly and
then put out his hand and made his move--with the fiercely suspicious
air of a boss compelled to send an extremely unreliable underling on an
all-important errand.

Then he punched his clock, sprang to his feet, and once more waved for
Vanderhoef.

Thirty seconds later the Tournament Director, very red-faced now, was
saying in a low voice, almost pleadingly, "But Bela, I cannot keep
asking them to change the screens. Already they have been up twice and
down once to please you. Moving them disturbs the other players and
surely isn't good for your own peace of mind. Oh, Bela, my dear Bela--"

Vanderhoef broke off. Grabo knew he had been going to say something
improper but from the heart, such as, "For God's sake don't blow this
game out of nervousness now that you have a win in sight"--and this
sympathy somehow made the Hungarian furious.

"I have other complaints which I will make formally after the game,"
he said harshly, quivering with rage. "It is a disgrace the way that
mechanism punches the time-clock button. It will crack the case! The
Machine never stops humming! And it stinks of ozone and hot metal, as
if it were about to explode!"

"It _cannot_ explode, Bela. Please!"

"No, but it threatens to! And you know a threat is always more
effective than an actual attack! As for the screens, they must be taken
down at once, I demand it!"

"Very well, Bela, very well, it will be done. Compose yourself."

Grabo did not at once return to his table--he could not have endured to
sit still for the moment--but paced along the line of tables, snatching
looks at the other games in progress. When he looked back at the big
electric board, he saw that the Machine had made a move although he
hadn't heard it punch the clock. He rushed back and studied the board
without sitting down. Why, the Machine had made a _stupid_ move, he saw
with a rush of exaltation. At that moment the last screen being folded
started to fall over, but one of the gray-smocked men caught it deftly.
Grabo flinched and his hand darted out and moved a piece.

He heard someone gasp. Vanderhoef.

       *       *       *       *       *

It got very quiet. The four soft clicks of the move being fed into the
Machine were like the beat of a muffled drum.

There was a buzzing in Grabo's ears. He looked down at the board in
horror.

The Machine blinked, blinked once more and then, although barely twenty
seconds had elapsed, moved a rook.

On the glassy gray margin above the Machine's electric board, large red
words flamed on:

    CHECK! AND MATE IN THREE

Up in the stands Dave squeezed Sandra's arm. "He's done it! He's let
himself be swindled."

"You mean the Machine has beaten Grabo?" Sandra asked.

"What else?"

"Can you be sure? Just like that?"

"Of cour.... Wait a second.... Yes, I'm sure."

"Mated in three like a potzer," Bill confirmed.

"The poor old boob," Judy sighed.

Down on the floor Bela Grabo sagged. The assistant director moved
toward him quickly. But then the Hungarian straightened himself a
little.

"I resign," he said softly.

The red words at the top of the board were wiped out and briefly
replaced, in white, by:

    THANK YOU FOR A GOOD GAME

And then a third statement, also in white, flashed on for a few seconds:

    YOU HAD BAD LUCK

Bela Grabo clenched his fists and bit his teeth. Even _the Machine_ was
being sorry for him!

He stiffly walked out of the hall. It was a long, long walk.


                                   V

Adjournment time neared. Serek, the exchange down but with considerable
time on his clock, sealed his forty-sixth move against Sherevsky and
handed the envelope to Vanderhoef. It would be opened when the game was
resumed at the morning session. Dr. Krakatower studied the position on
his board and then quietly tipped over his king. He sat there for a
moment as if he hadn't the strength to rise. Then he shook himself a
little, smiled, got up, clasped hands briefly with Lysmov and wandered
over to watch the Angler-Jal game.

Jandorf had resigned his game to Votbinnik some minutes ago, rather
more surlily.

After a while Angler sealed a move, handing it to Vanderhoef with a
grin just as the little red flag dropped on his clock, indicating he'd
used every second of his time.

Up in the stands Sandra worked her shoulders to get a kink out of her
back. She'd noticed several newsmen hurrying off to report in the
Machine's first win. She was thankful that her job was limited to
special articles.

"Chess is a pretty intense game," she remarked to Dave.

He nodded. "It's a killer. I don't expect to live beyond forty myself."

"Thirty," Bill said.

"Twenty-five is enough time to be a meteor," said Judy.

Sandra thought to herself: _the Unbeat Generation_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Next day Sherevsky played the Machine to a dead-level ending. Simon
Great offered a draw for the Machine (over an unsuccessful interfering
protest from Jandorf that this constituted making a move for the
Machine) but Sherevsky refused and sealed his move.

"He wants to have it proved to him that the Machine can play end
games," Dave commented to Sandra up in the stands. "I don't blame him."

At the beginning of today's session Sandra had noticed that Bill and
Judy were following each game in a very new-looking book they shared
jealously between them. _Won't look new for long_, Sandra had thought.

"That's the 'Bible' they got there," Dave had explained. "MCO-_Modern
Chess Openings_. It lists all the best open-moves in chess, thousands
and thousands of variations. That is, what masters _think_ are the
best moves. The moves that have won in the past, really. We chipped in
together to buy the latest edition--the 13th--just hot off the press,"
he had finished proudly.

Now with the Machine-Sherevsky ending the center of interest, the kids
were consulting another book, one with grimy, dog-eared pages. "That's
the 'New Testament'--_Basic Chess Endings_," Dave said when he noticed
her looking. "There's so much you must know in endings that it's
amazing the Machine can play them at all. I guess as the pieces get
fewer it starts to look deeper."

       *       *       *       *       *

Sandra nodded. She was feeling virtuous. She had got her interview with
Jandorf and then this morning one with Grabo ("How it Feels to Have a
Machine Out-Think You"). The latter had made her think of herself as a
real vulture of the press, circling over the doomed. The Hungarian had
seemed in a positively suicidal depression.

One newspaper article made much of the Machine's "psychological
tactics," hinting that the blinking lights were designed to hypnotize
opponents. The general press coverage was somewhat startling. A game
that in America normally rated only a fine-print column in the back
sections of a very few Sunday papers was now getting boxes on the front
page. The defeat of a man by a machine seemed everywhere to awaken
nervous feelings of insecurity, like the launching of the first sputnik.

Sandra had rather hesitantly sought out Dr. Krakatower during the close
of the morning session of play, still feeling a little guilty from her
interview with Grabo. But Doc had seemed happy to see her and quite
recovered from last night's defeat, though when she had addressed him
as "Master Krakatower" he had winced and said, "Please, not that!"
Another session of coffee and wine-and-seltzer had resulted in her
getting an introduction to her first Soviet grandmaster, Serek, who had
proved to be unexpectedly charming. He had just managed to draw his
game with Sherevsky (to the great amazement of the kibitzers, Sandra
learned) and was most obliging about arranging for an interview.

Not to be outdone in gallantry, Doc had insisted on escorting Sandra
to her seat in the stands--at the price of once more losing a couple
of minutes on his clock. As a result her stock went up considerably
with Dave, Bill and Judy. Thereafter they treated anything she had
to say with almost annoying deference--Bill especially, probably in
penance for his thoughtless cracks at Doc. Sandra later came to suspect
that the kids had privately decided that she was Dr. Krakatower's
mistress--probably a new one because she was so scandalously ignorant
of chess. She did not disillusion them.

Doc lost again in the second round--to Jal.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the third round Lysmov defeated the Machine in 27 moves. There was
a flaring of flashbulbs, a rush of newsmen to the phones, jabbering in
the stands and much comment and analysis that was way over Sandra's
head--except she got the impression that Lysmov had done something
tricky.

The general emotional reaction in America, as reflected by the
newspapers, was not too happy. One read between the lines that for the
Machine to beat a man was bad, but for a Russian to beat an American
machine was worse. A widely-read sports columnist, two football
coaches, and several rural politicians announced that chess was a
morbid game played only by weirdies. Despite these thick-chested
he-man statements, the elusive mood of insecurity deepened.

Besides the excitement of the Lysmov win, a squabble had arisen in
connection with the Machine's still-unfinished end game with Sherevsky,
which had been continued through one morning session and was now headed
for another.

Finally there were rumors that World Business Machines was planning to
replace Simon Great with a nationally famous physicist.

Sandra begged Doc to try to explain it all to her in kindergarten
language. She was feeling uncertain of herself again and quite subdued
after being completely rebuffed in her efforts to get an interview with
Lysmov, who had fled her as if she were a threat to his Soviet virtue.

Doc on the other hand was quite vivacious, cheered by his third-round
draw with Jandorf.

"Most willingly, my dear," he said. "Have you ever noticed that
kindergarten language can be far honester than the adult tongues? Fewer
fictions. Well, several of us hashed over the Lysmov game until three
o'clock this morning. Lysmov wouldn't, though. Neither would Votbinnik
or Jal. You see, I have my communication problems with the Russians too.

"We finally decided that Lysmov had managed to guess with complete
accuracy both the depth at which the Machine is analyzing in the
opening and middle game (ten moves ahead instead of eight, we think--a
prodigious achievement!) and also the main value scale in terms of
which the Machine selects its move.

"Having that information, Lysmov managed to play into a combination
which would give the Machine a maximum plus value in its value scale
(win of Lysmov's queen, it was) after ten moves but a checkmate for
Lysmov on his second move _after_ the first ten. A human chess master
would have seen a trap like that, but the Machine could not, because
Lysmov was maneuvering in an area that did not exist for the Machine's
perfect but limited mind. Of course the Machine changed its tactics
after the first three moves of the ten had been played--it could see
the checkmate then--but by that time it was too late for it to avert a
disastrous loss of material. It was tricky of Lysmov, but completely
fair. After this we'll all be watching for the opportunity to play the
same sort of trick on the Machine.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Lysmov was the first of us to realize fully that _we are not playing
against a metal monster but against a certain kind of programming_.
If there are any weaknesses we can spot in that programming, we can
win. Very much in the same way that we can again and again defeat a
flesh-and-blood player when we discover that he consistently attacks
without having an advantage in position or is regularly overcautious
about launching a counter-attack when he himself is attacked without
justification."

Sandra nodded eagerly. "So from now on your chances of beating the
Machine should keep improving, shouldn't they? I mean as you find out
more and more about the programming."

Doc smiled. "You forget," he said gently, "that Simon Great can change
the programming before each new game. Now I see why he fought so hard
for that point."

"Oh. Say, Doc, what's this about the Sherevsky end game?"

"You are picking up the language, aren't you?" he observed. "Sherevsky
got a little angry when he discovered that Great had the Machine
programmed to analyze steadily on the next move after an adjournment
until the game was resumed next morning. Sherevsky questioned whether
it was fair for the Machine to 'think' all night while its opponent had
to get some rest. Vanderhoef decided for the Machine, though Sherevsky
may carry the protest to FIDE.

"Bah--I think Great wants us to get heated up over such minor matters,
just as he is happy (and oh so obliging!) when we complain about how
the Machine blinks or hums or smells. It keeps our minds off the main
business of trying to outguess his programming. Incidentally, that is
one thing we decided last night--Sherevsky, Willie Angler, Jandorf,
Serek, and myself--that we are all going to have to learn to play the
Machine without letting it get on our nerves and without asking to be
protected from it. As Willie puts it, 'So suppose it sounds like a
boiler factory even--okay, you can think in a boiler factory.' Myself,
I am not so sure of that, but his spirit is right."

Sandra felt herself perking up as a new article began to shape itself
in her mind. She said, "And what about WBM replacing Simon Great?"

Again Doc smiled. "I think, my dear, that you can safely dismiss that
as just a rumor. I think that Simon Great has just begun to fight."


                                  VI

Round Four saw the Machine spring the first of its surprises.

It had finally forced a draw against Sherevsky in the morning session,
ending the long second-round game, and now was matched against
Votbinnik.

The Machine opened Pawn to King Four, Votbinnik replied Pawn to King
Three.

"The French Defense, Binny's favorite," Dave muttered and they settled
back for the Machine's customary four-minute wait.

Instead the Machine moved at once and punched its clock.

Sandra, studying Votbinnik through her glasses, decided that the
Russian grandmaster looked just a trifle startled. Then he made his
move.

Once again the Machine responded instantly.

There was a flurry of comment from the stands and a scurrying-about
of officials to shush it. Meanwhile the Machine continued to make its
moves at better than rapid-transit speed, although Votbinnik soon began
to take rather more time on his.

The upshot was that the Machine made eleven moves before it started to
take time to 'think' at all.

Sandra clamored so excitedly to Dave for an explanation that she had
two officials waving at her angrily.

As soon as he dared, Dave whispered, "Great must have banked on
Votbinnik playing the French--almost always does--and fed all the
variations of the French into the Machine's 'memory' from MCO and maybe
some other books. So long as Votbinnik stuck to a known variation of
the French, why, the Machine could play from memory without analyzing
at all. Then when a strange move came along--one that wasn't in
its memory--only on the twelfth move yet!--the Machine went back to
analyzing, only now it's taking longer and going deeper because it's
got more time--six minutes a move, about. The only thing I wonder is
why Great didn't have the Machine do it in the first three games. It
seems so obvious."

Sandra ticketed that in her mind as a question for Doc. She slipped
off to her room to write her "Don't Let a Robot Get Your Goat" article
(drawing heavily on Doc's observations) and got back to the stands
twenty minutes before the second time-control point. It was becoming a
regular routine.

Votbinnik was a knight down--almost certainly busted, Dave explained.

"It got terrifically complicated while you were gone," he said. "A real
Votbinnik position."

"Only the Machine out-binniked him," Bill finished.

Judy hummed Beethoven's "Funeral March for the Death of a Hero."

Nevertheless Votbinnik did not resign. The Machine sealed a move. Its
board blacked out and Vanderhoef, with one of his assistants standing
beside him to witness, privately read the move off a small indicator
on the console. Tomorrow he would feed the move back into the Machine
when play was resumed at the morning session.

Doc sealed a move too although he was two pawns down in his game
against Grabo and looked tired to death.

"They don't give up easily, do they?" Sandra observed to Dave. "They
must really love the game. Or do they hate it?"

"When you get to psychology it's all beyond me," Dave replied. "Ask me
something else."

Sandra smiled. "Thank you, Dave," she said. "I will."

       *       *       *       *       *

Come the morning session, Votbinnik played on for a dozen moves then
resigned.

A little later Doc managed to draw his game with Grabo by perpetual
check. He caught sight of Sandra coming down from the stands and waved
to her, then made the motions of drinking.

_Now he looks almost like a boy_, Sandra thought as she joined him.

"Say, Doc," she asked when they had secured a table, "why is a rook
worth more than a bishop?"

He darted a suspicious glance at her. "That is not your kind of
question," he said sternly. "Exactly what have you been up to?"

Sandra confessed that she had asked Dave to teach her how to play chess.

"I knew those children would corrupt you," Doc said somberly. "Look,
my dear, if you learn to play chess you won't be able to write your
clever little articles about it. Besides, as I warned you the first
day, chess is a madness. Women are ordinarily immune, but that doesn't
justify you taking chances with your sanity."

"But I've kind of gotten interested, watching the tournament," Sandra
objected. "At least I'd like to know how the pieces move."

"Stop!" Doc commanded. "You're already in danger. Direct your mind
somewhere else. Ask me a sensible, down-to-earth journalist's
question--something completely irrational!"

"Okay, why didn't Simon Great have the Machine set to play the openings
fast in the first three games?"

"Hah! I think Great plays Lasker-chess in his programming. He hides his
strength and tries to win no more easily than he has to, so he will
have resources in reserve. The Machine loses to Lysmov and immediately
starts playing more strongly--the psychological impression made on the
other players by such tactics is formidable."

"But the Machine isn't ahead yet?"

"No, of course not. After four rounds Lysmov is leading the tournament
with 3-1/2--1/2, meaning 3-1/2 in the win column and 1/2 in the loss
column...."

"How do you half win a game of chess? Or half lose one?" Sandra
interrupted.

"By drawing a game--playing to a tie. Lysmov's 3-1/2--1/2 is
notational shorthand for three wins and a draw. Understand? My dear, I
don't usually have to explain things to you in such detail."

"I just didn't want you to think I was learning too much about chess."

"Ho! Well, to get on with the score after four rounds, Angler
and Votbinnik both have 3--1, while the Machine is bracketed at
2-1/2--1-1/2 with Jal. But the Machine has created an impression of
strength, as if it were all set to come from behind with a rush."
He shook his head. "At the moment, my dear," he said, "I feel very
pessimistic about the chances of neurons against relays in this
tournament. Relays don't panic and fag. But the oddest thing...."

"Yes?" Sandra prompted.

"Well, the oddest thing is that the Machine doesn't play 'like a
machine' at all. It uses dynamic strategy, the kind we sometimes call
'Russian', complicating each position as much as possible and creating
maximum tension. But that too is a matter of the programming...."

       *       *       *       *       *

Doc's foreboding was fulfilled as round followed hard-fought round.
In the next five days (there was a weekend recess) the Machine
successively smashed Jandorf, Serek and Jal and after seven rounds was
out in front by a full point.

Jandorf, evidently impressed by the Machine's flawless opening play
against Votbinnik, chose an inferior line in the Ruy Lopez to get the
Machine "out of the books." Perhaps he hoped that the Machine would
go on blindly making book moves, but the Machine did not oblige.
It immediately slowed its play, "thought hard" and annihilated the
Argentinian in 25 moves.

Doc commented, "The Wild Bull of the Pampas tried to use the living
force of his human personality to pull a fast one and swindle the
Machine. Only the Machine didn't swindle."

Against Jal, the Machine used a new wrinkle. It used a variable amount
of time on moves, apparently according to how difficult it "judged" the
position to be.

When Serek got a poor pawn-position the Machine simplified the game
relentlessly, suddenly discarding its hitherto "Russian" strategy. "It
plays like anything but a machine," Doc commented. "We know the reason
all too well--Simon Great--but doing something about it is something
else again. Great is hitting at our individual weaknesses wonderfully
well. Though I think I could play brilliant psychological chess myself
if I had a machine to do the detail work." Doc sounded a bit wistful.

The audiences grew in size and in expensiveness of wardrobe, though
most of the cafe society types made their visits fleeting ones.
Additional stands were erected. A hard-liquor bar was put in and then
taken out. The problem of keeping reasonable order and quiet became
an unending one for Vanderhoef, who had to ask for more "hushers."
The number of scientists and computer men, Navy, Army and Space Force
uniforms were more in evidence. Dave and Bill turned up one morning
with a three-dimensional chess set of transparent plastic and staggered
Sandra by assuring her that most bright young space scientists were
moderately adept at this 512-square game.

Sandra heard that WBM had snagged a big order from the War Department.
She also heard that a Syndicate man had turned up with a book on the
tournament, taking bets from the more heavily heeled types and that a
detective was circulating about, trying to spot him.

The newspapers kept up their front-page reporting, most of the writers
personalizing the Machine heavily and rather too cutely. Several of the
papers started regular chess columns and "How to Play Chess" features.
There was a flurry of pictures of movie starlets and such sitting at
chess boards. Hollywood revealed plans for two chess movies: "They
Made Her a Black Pawn" and "The Monster From King Rook Square". Chess
novelties and costume jewelry appeared. The United States Chess
Federation proudly reported a phenomenal rise in membership.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sandra learned enough chess to be able to blunder through a game with
Dave without attempting more than one illegal move in five, to avoid
the Scholar's Mate most of the time and to be able to checkmate with
two rooks though not with one. Judy had asked her, "Is _he_ pleased
that you're learning chess?"

Sandra had replied, "No, he thinks it is a madness." The kids had all
whooped at that and Dave had said, "How right he is!"

Sandra was scraping the bottom of the barrel for topics for her
articles, but then it occured to her to write about the kids, which
worked out nicely, and that led to a humorous article "Chess Is for
Brains" about her own efforts to learn the game, and for the nth time
in her career she thought of herself as practically a columnist and was
accordingly elated.

After his two draws, Doc lost three games in a row and still had the
Machine to face and then Sherevsky. His 1--6 score gave him undisputed
possession of last place. He grew very depressed. He still made a
point of squiring her about before the playing sessions, but she had to
make most of the conversation. His rare flashes of humor were rather
macabre.

"They have Dirty Old Krakatower locked in the cellar," he muttered just
before the start of the next to the last round, "and now they send the
robot down to destroy him."

"Just the same, Doc," Sandra told him, "good luck."

Doc shook his head. "Against a man luck might help. But against a
Machine?"

"It's not the Machine you're playing, but the programming. Remember?"

"Yes, but it's the Machine that doesn't make the mistake. And a mistake
is what I need most of all today. Somebody else's."

Doc must have looked very dispirited and tired when he left Sandra in
the stands, for Judy (Dave and Bill not having arrived yet) asked in a
confidential, womanly sort of voice, "What do you do for him when he's
so unhappy?"

"Oh, I'm especially passionate," Sandra heard herself answer.

"Is that good for him?" Judy demanded doubtfully.

"Sh!" Sandra said, somewhat aghast at her irresponsibility and
wondering if _she_ were getting tournament-nerves. "Sh, they're
starting the clocks."


                                  VII

Krakatower had lost two pawns when the first time-control point arrived
and was intending to resign on his 31st move when the Machine broke
down. Three of its pieces moved on the electric board at once, then
the board went dark and all the lights on the console went out except
five which started winking like angry red eyes. The gray-smocked men
around Simon Great sprang silently into action, filing around back
of the console. It was the first work anyone had seen them do except
move screens around and fetch each other coffee. Vanderhoef hovered
anxiously. Some flash bulbs went off. Vanderhoef shook his fist at the
photographers. Simon Great did nothing. The Machine's clock ticked on.
Doc watched for a while and then fell asleep.

When Vanderhoef jogged him awake, the Machine had just made its next
move, but the repair-job had taken 50 minutes. As a result the Machine
had to make 15 moves in 10 minutes. At 40 seconds a move it played
like a dub whose general lack of skill was complicated by a touch of
insanity. On his 43rd move Doc shrugged his shoulders apologetically
and announced mate in four. There were more flashes. Vanderhoef shook
his fist again. The machine flashed:

    YOU PLAYED BRILLIANTLY. CONGRATULATIONS!

Afterwards Doc said sourly to Sandra. "And _that_ was one big lie--a
child could have beat the Machine with that time advantage. Oh, what
an ironic glory the gods reserved for Krakatower's dotage--to vanquish
a broken-down computer! Only one good thing about it--that it didn't
happen while it was playing one of the Russians, or someone would
surely have whispered _sabotage_. And that is something of which they
do not accuse Dirty Old Krakatower, because they are sure he has not
got the brains even to think to sprinkle a little magnetic oxide powder
in the Machine's memory box. Bah!"

Just the same he seemed considerably more cheerful.

Sandra said guilelessly, "Winning a game means nothing to you chess
players, does it, unless you really do it by your own brilliancy?"

Doc looked solemn for a moment, then he started to chuckle. "You are
getting altogether too smart, Miss Sandra Lea Grayling," he said. "Yes,
yes--a chess player is happy to win in any barely legitimate way he
can, by an earthquake if necessary, or his opponent sickening before he
does from the bubonic plague. So--I confess it to you--I was very happy
to chalk up my utterly undeserved win over the luckless Machine."

"Which incidentally makes it anybody's tournament again, doesn't it,
Doc?"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Not exactly." Doc gave a wry little headshake. "We can't expect
another fluke. After all, the Machine has functioned perfectly seven
games out of eight, and you can bet the WBM men will be checking it all
night, especially since it has no adjourned games to work on. Tomorrow
it plays Willie Angler, but judging from the way it beat Votbinnik and
Jal, it should have a definite edge on Willie. If it beats him, then
only Votbinnik has a chance for a tie and to do that he must defeat
Lysmov. Which will be most difficult."

"Well," Sandra said, "don't you think that Lysmov might just kind of
let himself be beaten, to make sure a Russian gets first place or at
least ties for it?"

Doc shook his head emphatically. "There are many things a man, even a
chess master, will do to serve his state, but party loyalty doesn't
go that deep. Look, here is the standing of the players after eight
rounds." He handed Sandra a penciled list.

    ONE ROUND TO GO

    _Player_      _Wins_   _Losses_
    Machine       5-1/2      2-1/2
    Votbinnik     5-1/2      2-1/2
    Angler        5          3
    Jal           4-1/2      3-1/2
    Lysmov        4-1/2      3-1/2
    Serek         4-1/2      3-1/2
    Sherevsky     4          4
    Jandorf       2-1/2      5-1/2
    Grabo         2          6
    Krakatower    2          6

    LAST ROUND PAIRINGS

    Machine vs. Angler
    Votbinnik vs. Lysmov
    Jal vs. Serek
    Sherevsky vs. Krakatower
    Jandorf vs. Grabo

After studying the list for a while, Sandra said, "Hey, even Angler
could come out first, couldn't he, if he beat the Machine and Votbinnik
lost to Lysmov?"

"Could, could--yes. But I'm afraid that's hoping for too much,
barring another breakdown. To tell the truth, dear, the Machine is
simply too good for all of us. If it were only a little faster (and
these technological improvements always come) it would out-class us
completely. We are at that fleeting moment of balance when genius
is almost good enough to equal mechanism. It makes me feel sad, but
proud too in a morbid fashion, to think that I am in at the death of
grandmaster chess. Oh, I suppose the game will always be played, but it
won't ever be quite the same." He blew out a breath and shrugged his
shoulders.

"As for Willie, he's a good one and he'll give the Machine a long hard
fight, you can depend on it. He might conceivably even draw."

He touched Sandra's arm. "Cheer up, my dear," he said. "You should
remind yourself that a victory for the Machine is still a victory for
the USA."

       *       *       *       *       *

Doc's prediction about a long hard fight was decidedly not fulfilled.

Having White, the Machine opened Pawn to King Four and Angler went
into the Sicilian Defense. For the first twelve moves on each side
both adversaries pushed their pieces and tapped their clocks at such
lightning speed (Vanderhoef feeding in Angler's moves swiftly) that up
in the stands Bill and Judy were still flipping pages madly in their
hunt for the right column in MCO.

The Machine made its thirteenth move, still at blitz tempo.

"Bishop takes Pawn, check, and mate in three!" Willie announced very
loudly, made the move, banged his clock and sat back.

There was a collective gasp-and-gabble from the stands.

Dave squeezed Sandra's arm hard. Then for once forgetting that he was
Dr. Caution, he demanded loudly of Bill and Judy, "Have you two idiots
found that column yet? _The Machine's thirteenth move is a boner!_"

Pinning down the reference with a fingernail, Judy cried, "Yes! Here
it is on page 161 in footnote (e) (2) (B). Dave, _that same thirteenth
move for White is in the book_! But Black replies Knight to Queen Two,
not Bishop takes Pawn, check. And three moves later the book gives
White a plus value."

"What the heck, it can't be," Bill asserted.

"But it _is_. Check for yourself. _That boner is in the book._"

"Shut up, everybody!" Dave ordered, clapping his hands to his face.
When he dropped them a moment later his eyes gleamed. "I got it now!
Angler figured they were using the latest edition of MCO to program
the Machine on openings, he found an editorial error and then he
deliberately played the Machine into that variation!"

Dave practically shouted his last words, but that attracted no
attention as at that moment the whole hall was the noisiest it had been
throughout the tournament. It simmered down somewhat as the Machine
flashed a move.

Angler replied instantly.

The Machine replied almost as soon as Angler's move was fed into it.

Angler moved again, his move was fed into the Machine and the Machine
flashed:

    I AM CHECKMATED. CONGRATULATIONS!


                                 VIII

Next morning Sandra heard Dave's guess confirmed by both Angler and
Great. Doc had spotted them having coffee and a malt together and he
and Sandra joined them.

Doc was acting jubilant, having just drawn his adjourned game with
Sherevsky, which meant, since Jandorf had beaten Grabo, that he was
in undisputed possession of Ninth Place. They were all waiting for
the finish of the Votbinnik-Lysmov game, which would decide the final
standing of the leaders. Willie Angler was complacent and Simon Great
was serene and at last a little more talkative.

"You know, Willie," the psychologist said, "I was afraid that one of
you boys would figure out something like that. That was the chief
reason I didn't have the Machine use the programmed openings until
Lysmov's win forced me to. _I_ couldn't check every opening line in MCO
and the _Archives_ and _Shakhmaty_. There wasn't time. As it was, we
had a dozen typists and proofreaders busy for weeks preparing that part
of the programming and making sure it was accurate as far as following
the books went. Tell the truth now, Willie, how many friends did you
have hunting for flaws in the latest edition of MCO?"

Willie grinned. "Your unlucky 13th. Well, that's my secret. Though
I've always said that anyone joining the Willie Angler Fan Club ought
to expect to have to pay some day for the privilege. They're sharp,
those little guys, and I work their tails off."

Simon Great laughed and said to Sandra, "Your young friend Dave was
pretty sharp himself to deduce what had happened so quickly. Willie,
you ought to have him in the Bleeker Street Irregulars."

Sandra said, "I get the impression he's planning to start a club of his
own."

Angler snorted. "That's the one trouble with _my_ little guys. They're
all waiting to topple me."

Simon Great said, "Well, so long as Willie is passing up Dave, I want
to talk to him. It takes real courage in a youngster to question
authority."

"How should he get in touch with you?" Sandra asked.

While Great told her, Willie studied them frowningly.

"Si, are you planning to stick in this chess-programming racket?" he
demanded.

Simon Great did not answer the question. "You try telling me something,
Willie," he said. "Have you been approached the last couple of days by
IBM?"

"You mean asking me to take over your job?"

"I said _I_BM, Willie."

"Oh." Willie's grin became a tight one. "I'm not talking."

       *       *       *       *       *

There was a flurry of sound and movement around the playing tables.
Willie sprang up.

"Lysmov's agreed to a draw!" he informed them a moment later. "The
gangster!"

"Gangster because he puts you in equal first place with Votbinnik, both
of you ahead of the Machine?" Great inquired gently.

"Ahh, he could have beat Binny, giving me sole first. A Russian
gangster!"

Doc shook a finger. "Lysmov could also have _lost_ to Votbinnik,
Willie, putting you in second place."

"Don't think evil thoughts. So long, pals."

As Angler clattered down the stairs, Simon Great signed the waiter for
more coffee, lit a fresh cigarette, took a deep drag and leaned back.

"You know," he said "it's a great relief not to have to impersonate the
hyperconfident programmer for awhile. Being a psychologist has spoiled
me for that sort of thing. I'm not as good as I once was at beating
people over the head with my ego."

"You didn't do too badly," Doc said.

"Thanks. Actually, WBM is very much pleased with the Machine's
performance. The Machine's flaws made it seem more real and more
news-worthy, especially how it functioned when the going got
tough--those repairs the boys made under time pressure in your game,
Savilly, will help sell WBM computers or I miss my guess. In fact
nobody could have watched the tournament for long without realizing
there were nine smart rugged men out there, ready to kill that computer
if they could. The Machine passed a real test. And then the whole deal
dramatizes what computers are and what they can and can't do. And not
just at the popular level. The WBM research boys are learning a lot
about computer and programming theory by studying how the Machine and
its programmer behave under tournament stress. It's a kind of test
unlike that provided by any other computer work. Just this morning, for
instance, one of our big mathematicians told me that he is beginning to
think that the Theory of Games _does_ apply to chess, because you can
bluff and counterbluff with your programming. And _I'm_ learning about
human psychology."

Doc chuckled. "Such as that even human thinking is just a matter of how
you program your own mind?--that we're all like the Machine to that
extent?"

"That's one of the big points, Savilly. Yes."

Doc smiled at Sandra. "You wrote a nice little news-story, dear, about
how Man conquered the Machine by a palpitating nose and won a victory
for international amity.

"Now the story starts to go deeper."

       *       *       *       *       *

"A lot of things go deeper," Sandra replied, looking at him evenly.
"Much deeper than you ever expect at the start."

The big electric Scoreboard lit up.

            FINAL STANDING

    _Player_    _Wins_  _Losses_
    Angler       6        3
    Votbinnik    6        3
    Jal          5-1/2    3-1/2
    Machine      5-1/2    3-1/2
    Lysmov       5        4
    Serek        4-1/2    4-1/2
    Sherevsky    4-1/2    4-1/2
    Jandorf      3-1/2    5-1/2
    Krakatower   2-1/2    6-1/2
    Grabo        2        7

"It was a good tournament," Doc said. "And the Machine has proven
itself a grandmaster. It must make you feel good, Simon, after being
out of tournament chess for twenty years."

The psychologist nodded.

"Will you go back to psychology now?" Sandra asked him.

Simon Great smiled. "I can answer that question honestly, Miss
Grayling, because the news is due for release. No. WBM is pressing for
entry of the Machine in the Interzonal Candidates' Tournament. They
want a crack at the World's Championship."

Doc raised his eyebrows. "That's news indeed. But look, Simon, with the
knowledge you've gained in this tournament won't you be able to make
the Machine almost a sure winner in every game?"

"I don't know. Players like Angler and Lysmov may find some more flaws
in its functioning and dream up some new stratagems. Besides, there's
another solution to the problems raised by having a single computer
entered in a grandmaster tournament."

Doc sat up straight. "You mean having more programmer-computer teams
than just one?"

"Exactly. The Russians are bound to give their best players computers,
considering the prestige the game has in Russia. And I wasn't asking
Willie that question about IBM just on a hunch. Chess tournaments
are a wonderful way to test rival computers and show them off to the
public, just like cross-country races were for the early automobiles.
The future grandmaster will inevitably be a programmer-computer team, a
man-machine symbiotic partnership, probably with more freedom each way
than I was allowed in this tournament--I mean the man taking over the
play in some positions, the machine in others."

"You're making my head swim," Sandra said.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Mine is in the same storm-tossed ocean," Doc assured her. "Simon,
that will be very fine for the master who can get themselves
computers--either from their governments or from hiring out to big
firms. Or in other ways. Jandorf, I'm sure, will be able to interest
some Argentinian millionaire in a computer for him. While I... oh, I'm
too old... still, when I start to think about it.... But what about
the Bela Grabos? Incidentally, did you know that Grabo is contesting
Jandorf's win? Claims Jandorf discussed the position with Serek. I
think they exchanged about two words."

Simon shrugged, "The Bela Grabos will have to continue to fight their
own battles, if necessary satisfying themselves with the lesser
tournaments. Believe me, Savilly, from now on grandmaster chess without
one or more computers entered will lack sauce."

Dr. Krakatower shook his head and said, "Thinking gets more expensive
every year."

From the floor came the harsh voice of Igor Jandorf and the shrill one
of Bela Grabo raised in anger. Three words came through clearly: "... I
challenge you...."

Sandra said, "Well, there's something you can't build into a
machine--ego."

"Oh, I don't know about that," said Simon Great.

   [Transcriber's Note: No Section II or III headings in original.]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The 64-Square Madhouse, by Fritz Leiber

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE 64-SQUARE MADHOUSE ***

***** This file should be named 61213.txt or 61213.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/1/2/1/61213/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Immortals, by David Duncan

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Immortals

Author: David Duncan

Release Date: April 19, 2016 [EBook #51801]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE IMMORTALS ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                             THE IMMORTALS

                            By DAVID DUNCAN

                      Illustrated by Dick Francis

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                     Galaxy Magazine October 1960.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]




              Staghorn dared tug at the veil that hid the
              future. Maybe it wasn't a crime to look ...
              maybe it was just that the future was ugly!


I

Dr. Clarence Peccary was an objective man. His increasing irritation
was caused, he realized, by the fear that his conscience was going to
intervene between him and the vast fortune that was definitely within
his grasp. Millions. Billions! But he wanted to enjoy it.

He didn't want to skulk through life avoiding the eyes of everyone he
met--particularly when his life might last for centuries. So he sat
glowering at the rectangular screen that was located just above the
control console of Roger Staghorn's great digital computer.

At the moment Peccary was ready to accuse Staghorn of having no
conscience whatsoever. It was only through an act of scientific
detachment that he reminded himself that Staghorn neither had a fortune
to gain nor cared about gaining one. Staghorn's fulfillment was in
Humanac, the name he'd given the electronic monster that presently
claimed his full attention. He sat at the controls, his eyes luminous
behind the magnification of his thick lenses, his lanky frame arched
forward for a better view of Humanac's screen. Far from showing
annoyance at what he saw, there was a positive leer on his face.

As well there might be.

On the screen was the full color picture of a small park in what
appeared to be the center of a medium-sized town. It was a shabby
little park. Rags and tattered papers waggled indolently in the breeze.
The grass was an unkempt, indifferent pattern of greens and browns, as
though the caretaker took small pains in setting his sprinklers. Beyond
the square was a church, its steeple listing dangerously, its windows
broken and its heavy double doors sagging on their hinges.

Staghorn's leers and Dr. Peccary's glowers were not for the scenery,
however, but for the people who wandered aimlessly through the little
park and along the street beyond, carefully avoiding the area beneath
the leaning steeple. All of them were uniformly young, ranging from
perhaps seventeen at one extreme to no more than thirty at the other.
When Dr. Peccary had first seen them, he'd cried out joyfully, "You
see, Staghorn, all young! All handsome!" Then he'd stopped talking as
he studied those in the foreground more closely.

Their clothing, to call it that, was most peculiar. It was rags.

Here and there was a garment that bore a resemblance to a dress or
jacket or pair of trousers, but for the most part the people simply had
chunks of cloth wrapped about them in a most careless fashion. Several
would have been arrested for indecent exposure had they appeared
anywhere except on Humanac's screen. However, they seemed indifferent
to this--and to all else. A singularly attractive girl, in a costume
that would have made a Cretan blush, didn't even get a second glance
from, a young Adonis who passed her on the walk. Nor did she bestow one
on him. The park bench held more interest for her, so she sat down on
it.

Peccary studied her more closely, then straightened with a start.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I'll be damned," he said. "That's Jenny Cheever!"

Staghorn continued to leer at the girl. "So you know her?"

"I know her father. He owns the local variety store. She's only twenty
today, and there she is a hundred years from now, not a day older."

"Only her image, Dr. Peccary," Staghorn murmured. "Only her image. But
a very pretty one."

Peccary came to his feet, unable to control his irritation any longer.
"I won't believe it!" he said. "Somehow a piece of misinformation has
been fed into that machine. Its calculations are all wrong!"

Staghorn refused to be perturbed. "But you just said you recognize
the girl on the bench. I'd say that Humanac has to be working with
needle-point accuracy to put recognizable people into a prediction."

"Then shift the scene! For all I know this part of town was turned into
an insane asylum fifty years from now." The use of the past tense when
speaking of a future event was not ungrammatical in the presence of
Humanac. "Do you have the volume up?"

"Certainly. Can't you hear the birds twittering?"

"But I can't hear anyone talking."

"Perhaps it's a day of silence."

Staghorn took another long look at the girl on the parkbench and then
turned to the controls, using the fine adjustment on the geographical
locator. The screen flickered, blinked, and the scene changed. The two
men studied it.

"Recognize it?" said Staghorn.

Peccary gave an affirmative grunt. "That's the Jefferson grammar school
on Elm Street. I'm surprised it's still there. But, lord, as long as
they haven't built a new one, you'd think they'd at least keep the old
one repaired."

"Very shabby," Staghorn agreed.

It was. Large areas of the exterior plaster had fallen away. Windows
were shattered, and here and there the broken slats of Venetian blinds
stuck through them. The shrubbery around the building was dead; weeds
had sprung up through the cracks in the asphalt in the big play yard.
There was no sign of children.

"Where is everyone?" Peccary demanded. "You must have the time control
set for a Sunday or holiday."

"It's Tuesday," Staghorn said. Then both were silent because at that
moment a child appeared, a boy of about eleven.

       *       *       *       *       *

He burst from the schoolhouse door and ran across the cracked asphalt
toward the playground, glancing back over his shoulder as though
expecting pursuit. Reaching the play apparatus he paused and looked
around desperately. The metal standards for the swings were in place
but no swings hung from them. The fulcrums for the seesaws were there
but they held no wooden planks to permit teetering. The only piece of
equipment that looked capable of affording pleasure was the slide.

It was a small one, only about six feet high, obviously designed for
toddlers and not for a boy of eleven. Nonetheless, the boy headed for
it eagerly.

But he'd hardly set foot upon the bottom step of the ladder when the
schoolhouse door burst open a second time. A young woman charged toward
him shouting, "Paul! Get down from there at once! Paul!"

She was an attractive woman, but her voice held a note of panic. She
ran so swiftly that Paul, whose ascent of the ladder was accelerated
rather than retarded by her command, hadn't quite reached the top when
she seized him around the legs and tried to drag him down.

"Please, Miss Terry!" he pleaded desperately. "Just this once let me
get to the top! Let me slide down it just once!"

"Get to the top?" Miss Terry was aghast. "You could fall and kill
yourself. Down you come this instant!"

"Just one time!" Paul wailed. "Let me do it just once!"

Miss Terry paid no heed to his anguished cries. She tugged at his legs
while Paul clung to the handrails. But he was the weaker of the two,
and in a few seconds Miss Terry had torn him loose and set him on the
ground. Then, seizing him firmly by the hand, she led him back toward
the schoolhouse.

Paul went along, sniveling miserably. They entered the building and the
play yard was once more silent and deserted.

"By God, Staghorn," Peccary thundered, "you've doctored it! You've
deliberately fed false information into Humanac's memory cells!"

Staghorn turned to glare at his guest, his eyes flaming at the
outrageous suggestion. "The only hypothetical element I've fed into
Humanac is your Y Hormone, Dr. Peccary! You saw me do it. You watched
me check the computer before we started."

"I refuse to believe that my Y Hormone will bring about the
consequences that machine is predicting!"

"It's the only new factor that was added."

"How can you say that? During the next hundred years a thousand other
factors can enter in."

"But the Y Hormone bears an essential relationship to the whole. Sit
down and stop waving your arms. I'm going to see if we can get into the
school."

Peccary sat down, seething.

       *       *       *       *       *

It had been a mistake to bring his Y Hormone to Staghorn. It was simply
that he'd been thinking of himself as such a benefactor to the human
race that he couldn't wait to see a sample of the bright future he
intended to create.

"Think of it, Staghorn!" he'd said happily, earlier in the evening.
"The phrase 'art is long and time is fleeting' won't mean anything
any more! Artists will have hundreds of years to paint their pictures.
Think of the books that will be written, the music that will be
composed, the magnificent cities that will be built! Everyone will have
time enough to achieve perfection. Think of your work and mine. We'll
live long enough to unravel all the mysteries of the universe!"

Staghorn had said nothing. Instead, he'd uncorked the small bottle Dr.
Peccary had given him and sniffed at it.

The bottle contained a sample of the Y Hormone which Dr. Peccary had
spent many years developing. Its principal ingredient was a glandular
extract from insects, an organic compound that controlled the insects'
aging process. If administered artificially, it could keep insects in
the larval stage almost indefinitely.

Dr. Peccary's great contribution had been to synthesize this
extract--which affected only insects--with protein elements that
could be assimilated by mammals and humans. It had required years of
experimentation, but the result was his Y Hormone--Y for Youth.

In his laboratory he now had playful kittens that were six years old
and puppies that should have been fully grown dogs. The only human he'd
so far experimented on was himself. But because he'd started taking
the hormone only recently, he was as yet unable to say positively
that it was responsible for the splendid health he was enjoying. His
impatience to know the sociological consequences of the hormone had
made him bring a sample of it to Staghorn.

After sniffing at the bottle, Staghorn had poured its contents into
Humanac's analyzer.

The giant computer gurgled and belched a few seconds while it assessed
the nature of the formula. Then Staghorn connected the analyzer with
the machine's memory units.

As far as Humanac was concerned, the Y Hormone was now an accepted part
of human history.

But, except for this one added factor, the rest of Humanac's vast
memory was solidly based upon the complete known history of the
earth and the human race. Its principles of operation were the same
as those controlling other electronic "brains," which could be
programmed to predict tides, weather, election results or the state of
a department-store inventory at any given date in the future. Humanac
differed chiefly in the tremendously greater capacity of its memory
cells. Over the years it had digested thousands of books, codifying
and coordinating the information as fast as it was received. Its
photocells had recorded millions of visual impressions. Its auditory
units had absorbed the music and languages of the centuries. And its
methods of evaluation had been given a strictly human touch by feeding
into its resistance chambers the cephalic wave patterns produced by the
brains of Staghorn's colleagues.

       *       *       *       *       *

An added feature, though by no means an original one, was the screen
upon which Humanac produced visually the events of the time and place
for which the controls were set.

This screen was simply the big end of a cathode-ray tube, similar
to those used in television sets. It was adapted from I.B.M.'s 704
electronic computer used by the Vanguard tracking center to produce
visual predictions of the orbits of artificial satellites.

Staghorn was constantly having trouble explaining to people that
Humanac was not a time machine that could look into the past or future.
Its pictures of past events were based upon information already present
in its memory cells. Its pictures of future events were predictions
calculated according to the laws of probability. But because Humanac,
unlike a human, never forgot any of the million and one variables
impinging upon any human situation, its predictions were startlingly
accurate.

Humanac had never been exposed to pictures of Dr. Peccary's home town
nor to those of a girl named Jenny Cheever. It arrived at the likeness
of both town and girl through a purely mathematical process.

Staghorn's ultimate purpose in building the machine was to use it
in developing a true science of history. Because Humanac was only a
machine, Staghorn could alter its memory at will. By removing the
tiny unit upon which the Battle of Hastings was recorded and then
"re-playing" English history without it, he could find out what actual
effect that particular battle had.

He was surprised to discover that it had very little. According to
Humanac, the Normans would have conquered England anyway a few months
later.

At another time, while reviewing the events leading up to the American
Revolution, Humanac had produced a picture of Benjamin Franklin kissing
a beautiful young woman in the office of his printing shop. On impulse
Staghorn removed this seemingly insignificant event from Humanac's
memory and then turned the time dial forward to the present to see what
effect, if any, the episode had had upon history.

To his amazement, with that single kiss missing, Humanac produced a
picture of the American continent composed of six different nations
speaking French, German, Chinese, Hindu, Arabic and Muskogean--the last
being the language of an Indian nation occupying the Mississippi Valley
and extending northward to Lake Winnepeg. It served as a buffer state
between the Hindus and Chinese in the west and the French, Germans and
Arabs to the east.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was Humanac's ability to predict the future consequences of any
hypothetical event, however, that made it an instrument capable
of revolutionizing history. Once its dependability was thoroughly
established, it would be possible for a Secretary of State to submit
to Humanac the contents of a note intended for a foreign country, then
turn the time controls ahead and get Humanac's prediction of the note's
consequences.

If the consequences were good, the note would then be sent.

If they were bad, the Secretary could destroy the note and try
others--until he composed one that produced the desired result.

Humanac's flaw was that it had no way of explaining the predictions
produced on its screen. It merely showed what would happen when and
if certain things were done. It left it up to the human operator to
figure out why things happened that way.

This was what was troubling Dr. Peccary.

He could see not the remotest relationship between his Y Hormone and
the fact that a mathematical probability named Miss Terry should refuse
another mathematical probability named Paul permission to climb to the
top of a six-foot playground slide.

Meanwhile Staghorn had been using the fine adjustment on the geographic
locator and now grunted his satisfaction. "Good! We're in the building,
at least."

On the screen was a dusky corridor. On either side of it were classroom
doors, some closed, some ajar. Staghorn moved his hand from the fine
adjustment to the even more delicate vernier control which permitted
him to shift the geographic focus inches at a time. The focus drifted
slowly forward to one of the half-open doors, and then he and Dr.
Peccary were able to see into the classroom.

It was deserted. Desks were thick with dust. Books, yellow with age,
were strewn on the floor.

Staghorn's hand sought the vernier control again. The picture led them
on down the corridor to another open door.

Again it was a scene of desolation.

"This can have nothing to do with my Y Hormone!" Peccary insisted.

"Then why is your picture on the wall there?" Staghorn said with a note
of malicious pleasure.

Dr. Peccary looked and started. On the classroom wall was a faded
photograph of himself. Except that he was wearing a different suit
in the picture, he looked just as he looked at the present moment.
Staghorn got a closer focus on the photograph so that Peccary could
read the legend beneath it. _Dr. Clarence Peccary, the man who gave the
world the Y Hormone._

"All right then," said Peccary, somewhat mollified by this tribute. "If
they put my picture on school room walls a hundred years from now, it
means I'm an honored man, a man the world admires. And therefore the Y
Hormone _can't_ be the cause of all this desolation!"

"I've found that Humanac's reasoning and human reasoning differ in many
ways," said Staghorn. On the screen they were out in the corridor again
when from somewhere ahead came a woman's voice.

"You may recite now, Paul. Please stand up."

"Ah, that sounds like Miss Terry," said Staghorn. He fingered the
vernier control. The focal point slid forward along the corridor.

"Stand up and recite, Paul," Miss Terry said more sharply.

"I think they're in the room on the left," said Peccary.


II

The focus shifted to the open door and then Peccary and Staghorn could
see into the classroom. This one was in slightly better order than
the others and was occupied by two people. In front sat Miss Terry,
obviously the teacher, and at one of the desks sat Paul. He seemed to
be the entire class. At Miss Terry's urging he was coming to his feet,
his face still stained with tears. He held his book a few inches from
his nose and stared over the top of it sullenly.

"Go ahead, Paul," said Miss Terry, sweetly stubborn. "I'm waiting."

Paul looked at his book and read from it in a monotone, enunciating
each word carefully as though it had no relationship to the other
words. "I am a human being and as long as I obey the six rules I shall
live forever."

"Very good, Paul. Now read the six rules."

Paul sniffled loudly and commenced reading again. "Rule one: I must
never go near fire or my clothing may catch aflame and burn me up. Rule
two: I must keep away from deep water or I may fall in and drown. Rule
three: I must stay away from high places or I may fall and dash my
brains out." He paused to sniffle and wipe his nose on his sleeve, then
sighed and continued dismally. "Rule four: I must never play with sharp
things or I may cut myself and bleed to death. Rule five: I must never
ride horses or I may fall off and break my neck." Paul paused, lowering
his book.

"And the sixth rule?" said Miss Terry. "Go ahead and read the sixth
rule."

Reluctantly Paul lifted his book. "Rule six: Starting when I'm
twenty-one I must take Dr. Peccary's Y Hormone once a week to keep me
young and healthy forever."

"Excellent, Paul!" said Miss Terry. "And which rule were you breaking
just now on the playground?"

"I was breaking Rule Three," Paul said, then quoted sadly, "I must stay
away from high places or I may fall and dash my brains out."

       *       *       *       *       *

Dr. Peccary was on his feet stomping around in front of the computer.
"Sheer idiocy," he muttered. "He doesn't have any brains to dash out!
I'll admit that a computer with sufficient information about the state
of the world might be able to make accurate predictions of events a few
months or possibly a year into the future--but not one hundred years!
In that long an interval even the most trivial error could distort
every circuit in the machine." He jabbed a finger toward the screen
where Paul was seated at his desk again. "And that's what that picture
is--a distortion. I'm not going to let it influence me one bit in what
I intend to--" He broke off because of what was happening on the screen.

From somewhere outside the school building came the wail of a
deep-throated alarm. Both Miss Terry and Paul were on their feet and by
their expressions, terrified.

"The Atavars!" Paul cried, his entire body shaking.

"To the basement, Paul!" Miss Terry's face was blanched as she grasped
Paul's hand and headed toward the door. But halfway there, both came to
a halt, breathless and staring.

A powerful bearded man strode into the classroom.

Paul and Miss Terry fell back as he advanced. He was a man of about
fifty, his bushy hair shot with gray, his eyes cold and blue. He was
followed by two younger men who studied Paul and Miss Terry with
interest. All three wore rough work clothing.

The bearded man pointed at Paul. "There's the boy," he said quietly.
"Take him."

Paul let out a shriek of terror and fled into a corner as the two men
advanced. He clawed futilely as they laid hands on him. "For God's
sake, shut up," one of the men said with more disgust than anger. He
pinioned Paul's arms while the other man bound them together with a
strip of cloth.

Miss Terry meanwhile had collapsed into her chair. One of Paul's
captors glanced at her and spoke to the bearded man. "What about her?"

The bearded man stepped close to Miss Terry and put a hand on her
shoulder. She recoiled as from a snake. "How old are you?" he asked.
Miss Terry made some inarticulate squeaks and the man spoke more
sharply. "When were you born?"

"Two thousand four," she managed to stutter.

The bearded man considered this and shook his head. "Over fifty. By
that time they're hopeless. Leave her and bring the boy."

Miss Terry let out an agonized wail of protest and fainted across her
desk. One of the men slung Paul over his shoulder and the bearded
leader led the group from the room.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Amazing," murmured Staghorn. "Absolutely amazing. One never knows what
to expect."

"Pure gibberish," said Peccary, then betrayed his interest by saying,
"Can you follow them?"

"I'm trying to." Staghorn worked at the geographic adjustment and
finally got the screen focused on the corridor again. It was deserted.
The bearded man and his companions had already departed. Staghorn
touched the controls again, the screen flickered and once more the
little park came into focus. But now it, too, was deserted. None of
the ragged men and women were in sight, neither in the park nor on the
street beyond. Staghorn twisted the focus in all directions without
discovering anyone.

"That whistle we heard was obviously some kind of alarm," he said.
"Everyone must be in hiding--from the Atavars, whoever they are. I
strongly suspect that bearded fellow of being one."

"You might as well shut it off, Staghorn," Dr. Peccary said coldly.
"It's too much nonsense for any sane man to swallow. And unless that
machine can provide a full and satisfactory explanation as to why my Y
Hormone will bring about the conditions depicted on that screen, I see
no reason to keep the hormone off the market."

Staghorn turned from the controls to study his companion. "The only
possible way that Humanac could give us the entire background of events
leading up to what we've just seen would be to set the time control
to the present and then leave the machine running until it arrived at
this same period again. That would take a hundred years, and I'm not
going to sit here that long. What's more, I'm not going to touch your Y
Hormone even if you do put it on the market."

"There'll be plenty who will!"

"That's what Humanac says, yes."

Dr. Peccary gestured despairingly. After all, he did have a conscience.
"I simply don't believe my hormone can be responsible!"

"I'll remind you that your picture was on the classroom wall and that
the sixth rule read by that boy indicated that he was supposed to start
using your hormone when he reached the age of twenty-one. That would be
about the age to stop growing older."

"That boy is nothing but a mathematical probability!"

       *       *       *       *       *

"That's all you and I are," Staghorn said owlishly. "Mathematical
probabilities. Despite Omar, nothing exactly like either of us has ever
existed before or will exist again."

"But damn it, Staghorn...." Dr. Peccary sat down, his face in his
hands. "It's worth millions! I've invested years of work and all
the money I could scrape together. I don't see anything wrong in a
scientist's profiting by his discoveries. And to keep it off the
market just because that insane computer says that a hundred years
from now--" He broke off, glaring at Humanac's screen which was still
focused on the deserted park. "It simply doesn't make sense! The
machine doesn't give any reasons for anything. If there were a way
I could talk directly to some of those mathematical probabilities,
question them, ask them what it's all about...." He was on his feet,
striding back and forth before the computer again.

"Perhaps there is a way," Staghorn said quietly.

"Eh?"

"I said that it may be possible for you to talk with them."

"How?"

"By making your mind a temporary part of the computer."

Peccary studied the huge machine apprehensively--its ranks of memory
units, its chambers of flickering tubes, the labyrinth of circuits.
"How would you go about it?"

"I put you in the transmitter," Staghorn said. He stepped away from
the console and slid back a panel to reveal a niche with a seat in
it. Above the seat was a sort of helmet that resembled a hair drier
in a beauty parlor, except that it was studded with hundreds of tiny
magnets and transistors. Staghorn indicated the helmet. "This picks up
and amplifies brain waves. I've used it to record the cephalic wave
pattern of about a hundred men and women. The recordings are built
into the computer, enabling Humanac to assign a mathematical evaluation
to the influence of human emotion in making historic decisions. In your
case, instead of making a recording of your brain waves, I'd feed the
impulses directly into Humanac's memory units."

"And what would happen then?"

"I'm not altogether sure," said Staghorn, and it seemed to Peccary that
Staghorn was finding a definite relish in his uncertainty. "I've never
tried the experiment before."

"I might get electrocuted?"

"No. There's no danger of that happening. The current that activates
the transmitter comes from your own brain, and as you know, such
electrical impulses are extremely feeble. That isn't what worries me."

"Well then, what does?"

"In some ways Humanac behaves peculiarly like a living organism. For
example, there's one prediction it can never make. Several times I've
fed into it the hypothetical information that the two opposing factions
of the world have declared war. Naturally everyone would like to know
about the outcome of such a war." Staghorn paused, gazing lovingly at
his majestic creation.

"And what happens?" Dr. Peccary said impatiently.

"Nothing. That's just it. The moment I turn Humanac into the future
to get a prediction, the screen goes dead. Do you know why it goes
dead?" Staghorn looked at Peccary with a pleased smile and didn't wait
for Peccary to cue him. "It goes dead because, if war were declared,
Humanac would be the first target for enemy bombs. When it predicts a
future event, it has to take all factors into consideration. If one of
those factors is its own destruction, it can predict nothing beyond
that moment."

       *       *       *       *       *

Peccary repeated this sentence in his mind while he slowly digested its
meaning. What it seemed to mean was that, although Staghorn and Peccary
thought of Humanac as only a complicated machine, Humanac's opinion of
itself was altogether otherwise. It could foresee its own death.

"I often wonder," mused Staghorn, "about those people we see wandering
around on Humanac's screen. To us they're only images made by a
stream of electrons hitting the end of a cathode ray tube. Their space
and time is an illusion. All the same, Humanac comprises an entire
system--a system modeled as accurately as possible on our own. It's
just possible that the boy we saw, Paul, was experiencing a real
terror."

Dr. Peccary examined Staghorn in amazement. He had often suspected that
Staghorn's genius was tinged with madness. "You're not suggesting that
those ... those images are conscious?"

"Ah! What is consciousness?"

"I didn't come here to get into a metaphysical argument."

"No, but it's only fair for me to suggest the possible emotional
hazzards involved in hooking you up to Humanac. Because you have to
admit that _you'll_ be conscious during the experiment."

"Certainly. But I'll be sitting right there." Peccary pointed to the
seat in the transmitter unit.

"In a sense, yes. Very well, take your seat."

Peccary eyed the helmet uneasily. "I'm not sure I want to do this."

"But you do want to make millions from the Y Hormone. And you want to
enjoy it with a clear conscience. Perhaps it's as you say--there may
be other factors involved. By knowing what they are you may be able to
negate their influence." Staghorn's voice was a soft purr as he took
Dr. Peccary's arm and urged him into the transmitter unit. Peccary sat
down. The seat was small and hard.

"Just bear one thing in mind," Staghorn said. "Don't get lost. It will
be best if you stay in the little park where I can see you and where
you'll be in focus. Unless you're in focus it might be impossible
to--ah--disengage you."

Dr. Peccary could find no meaning whatsoever in this statement, except
confirmation of his suspicion that Staghorn was mad. He felt this so
strongly that he started to rise from his seat and escape from the
transmitter cell. But at that moment Staghorn lowered the helmet onto
his head. The sensation he experienced was so novel and startling that
he remained seated. For a second or two he could feel the tiny metallic
contacts on the inside of the helmet pressing against his skull, but
this sensation of physical pressure vanished almost at once. It was
replaced by one of headlessness. His body up to his chin still seemed
to be sitting in the transmitter--but his intellect had lost completely
its sense of localization in the head.

He could think clearly enough, but had no notion as to the spot where
his thoughts originated. Indeed, the whole concept of relative position
seemed ridiculous. At the same instant he felt tall as a mountain and
as low as a rug. His mind could fill the entire universe, while resting
neatly in a thimble. He could also see Staghorn, for his eyes continued
to function and transmit optical patterns, but precisely where he was
while receiving these patterns he couldn't possibly say.

He heard Staghorn remark, "Fine. The connection is perfect. It's always
better when the subject is bald. I'm going to switch you over into
Humanac's circuits now."

Staghorn's hand moved across the controls and one of his long fingers
flipped a switch.

       *       *       *       *       *

This was the last Dr. Peccary saw of Roger Staghorn. Instantly he found
himself standing in the center of the small park in his home town. His
reaction was not one of alarm. Quite to the contrary, his immediate
thought was one of surprise that he wasn't alarmed. Standing there in
the little square felt entirely normal and proper.

Next he was jolted by the realization that he must be an image on
Humanac's screen. He quickly looked about in all directions, half
expecting to see Staghorn's huge face peering down from the sky like
God. There was no sign of Staghorn, however. The world about him was
as three-dimensional as any he'd ever known. He was in his home town a
hundred years after he'd last seen it.

Good lord! He was a hundred and forty-two years old!

This realization was followed by a host of others. Like a man coming
out of amnesia, his past began filling with memories. He was rich. He
was the richest man on earth. His Y Hormone was used the world over. A
mile away, on the outskirts of town, he could see a portion of his huge
production plant. He lived in a majestic palace surrounded by every
manner of automatic protective device. Protection? From what? And how
had he dared to venture out here in the park alone? But wait ... wait.
It was all an illusion. Actually he was only an image on Humanac's
screen, a mathematical probability.

He must keep that fact firmly in mind, or he might lose his mental
balance.

He gazed about at the town, dismayed by its appearance. Not a person
in sight. Not even an automobile. Of course, the motor car might have
become obsolete during the passage of a hundred years. There must be
some new mode of transportation--something undreamed of a century ago!

While he was wondering what this might be, he heard a
clop-clop-clopping and was astonished to see three horsemen approaching
the square. As they came closer he recognized them as the bearded man
and his two companions.

The boy Paul was bound firmly behind one of the saddles.

A strange panic arose in Dr. Peccary's breast, but he managed to
suppress it with a reminder that this was all illusion. He was here
for purposes of information; he must have the courage to get it. So
he forced himself to the curb at the edge of the park. When the riders
were within speaking distance, he managed to hail them with, "Hey, you!"

His nervousness made his words harsh. But then, there was no reason why
he should speak politely to kidnapers. He saw that Paul was conscious.
The boy had a gag over his mouth but his eyes were open.

       *       *       *       *       *

The three riders reined in their horses and looked at Peccary with
frank curiosity.

"Here's one that didn't hide," one of them remarked, in a tone that Dr.
Peccary decided was disrespectful. He stepped forward boldly.

"May I ask what you intend to do with that boy?" he demanded.

"He wants to know what we intend to do with the boy," said the same man.

"Yes, I heard what he said," the bearded man remarked quietly. He
hadn't ceased to study Peccary with his piercing blue eyes. Now he
urged his horse closer. "You must be a stranger here, son?"

"Not exactly," said Peccary. "As a matter of fact, I was born here.
That was some time ago and it's true I haven't been here recently." The
way the bearded man stared at him made him extremely nervous. "But I'm
sure that kidnaping is against the law. If you don't release that boy
I'll have to--to make a citizen's arrest!" Peccary knew that his words
sounded ridiculous. From the way the three riders exchanged glances it
was evident that they thought the same thing.

"He's going to make a citizen's arrest," commented the one who liked to
repeat whatever Peccary said.

"Hush," said the bearded leader. And then to Peccary, "What's your
name, son?"

"Clarence Peccary. If you don't do as I say I'll--" He stopped short,
his heart leaping as the force of his indiscretion struck him.

The three men had been struck also.

The two younger ones were already on the ground, one on either side
of him. Only the bearded man remained mounted. He leaned forward. "I
thought you looked familiar. You're _Doctor_ Peccary of the Y Hormone?"
His voice was a menacing whisper. Peccary finally answered with a slow
nod.

"He must have flipped, running around alone like this," a man beside
him said. "However, let's never insult fortune!"

This was the last Dr. Peccary heard. For at that instant one of the
men--he never knew which--struck him forcibly over the head with a
blunt instrument.


III

At Humanac's controls Roger Staghorn leaped to his feet in alarm as he
saw what was happening on the screen.

Peccary had collapsed now. The two men were draping him across the
bearded man's saddle. There wasn't an instant to lose! Staghorn leaped
to the transmitter cell where Peccary's material body was seated,
his eyes peacefully closed. Staghorn flipped the switch to disengage
Peccary's consciousness from Humanac's circuits.

Nothing happened. Peccary's body remained as before, blissfully asleep.

Good lord, of course nothing happened! How could it? Peccary had just
been knocked cold; at the moment he didn't _have_ any consciousness!
Staghorn opened the circuit again and whirled back to the control
console.

He looked at the screen. All three men were mounted again. The bearded
leader gestured them on.

They set spurs to their horses and galloped away, taking the
unconscious Peccary with them.

"No!" Staghorn shouted at the fleeing images. "No, Dr. Peccary! Stay
in focus!" The horsemen paid no heed--nor did Staghorn expect them to,
rationally. His shouts were only involuntary expressions of despair.
Grasping the geographic locator, he twiddled it wildly, managing to
keep the three riders in focus for several blocks as they sped down a
street of the deserted town.

Then they rounded a corner and he lost them.

By the time he got a focus on the area around the corner they were
gone. For several minutes he continued to search, shifting the focal
point all over town, but in vain. Dr. Clarence Peccary was lost inside
Humanac's labyrinthean brain!

Staghorn was stunned. There would be no difficulty in keeping Peccary's
physical body alive indefinitely by intravenous feeding, but it was
as good as dead while separated from its sense of identity. Worse yet
were the probable consequences to Humanac of having a free soul loose
in its mathematical universe. These were too dire to contemplate. The
machine's reliability might be altogether ruined and Staghorn's life
work destroyed. Under the circumstances there was but one course of
action. He had to find Dr. Peccary and get him back into focus, so that
he could be disengaged from the computer.

First Staghorn focused the geographic locator on the town square,
the point from which Peccary had been abducted; from there he could
begin tracking him. Next he set the time control so that it would
automatically disengage the transmitter units in exactly three hours.

Whether or not he could find Dr. Peccary in that period of time
Staghorn had no way of knowing; but at least he should be able to get
himself back into focus at the proper moment. Then, in case he'd failed
to find Peccary, he could reset the time clock and try again.

Next he opened a second transmitter unit, sat down on the little seat
and pulled the helmet down on his head. As sensations of vastness and
lost dimensions spread through him, he reached out and pressed down the
switch that would pour his own brain impulses into Humanac's circuits.

       *       *       *       *       *

Instantly, as with Dr. Peccary, Staghorn found himself standing in the
little park.

He examined his hands and slapped his sides a few times, taking time to
assimilate the fact that he felt perfectly solid. Ah, Bishop Berkeley
was right all the time! The universe was subjective--a creation of
consciousness!

He left off these speculations and recalled himself to his mission.

Glancing around, he saw that people were beginning to reappear. They
came up from basements and out of the doors of the dilapidated houses
and buildings. If there had been a panic, there was no sign of it
now. The men and women moved indolently, returning toward the park and
the sunlit streets. All were so much the same age and of such similar
beauty that it was difficult to distinguish individual members of the
same sex. But he finally recognized the girl Dr. Peccary had identified
as Jenny Cheever. She had an attractive strawberry birthmark on her hip.

She strolled back into the park accompanied by a young man. The two of
them took possession of the bench where Jenny had been seated earlier.
They sat well apart from each other, silently contemplating the other
passers-by.

Feeling that his knowledge of Jenny's name constituted a sort of
introduction, Staghorn approached the couple. The man paid no attention
to him but Jenny watched him curiously. Staghorn was not a man over
whom women swooned, and it occurred to him that she found something odd
about his dark suit and thick spectacles. He seemed to be the only man
in town wearing either.

"How do you do," he said to her. "I believe you're Ben Cheever's
daughter."

She continued to examine him languidly, slowly stroking a heavy strand
of her auburn hair. "Am I?" she said at last. "It's been so long I've
forgotten. But then I had to be someone's daughter and since my name
is Cheever, you may be right. I don't remember you. We must have met
ages and ages ago."

"This is the first time we've met. You were pointed out to me by a
friend."

She considered this with a puzzled air, and, idly curious, said, "Do
you want to marry me?"

"Good heavens, no!"

Jenny didn't seem to be insulted by his abruptness. "I just wondered
why you'd speak to me," she said. "Because if you want to marry me you
have to wait. I've promised to marry him first." She gestured to the
man on the bench with her. The man looked at Staghorn for the first
time.

"Yeah," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I see," said Staghorn. "And when is this ... merry event to take
place?"

"Some day," Jenny said indifferently. "When we both feel like it.
There's no use rushing things. I don't want to use up all the men too
soon."

"Use them up?"

"He'll be my twenty-fifth husband."

"Yeah," said the man. "She'll be my thirty-second wife."

"Your marriages can't last very long," said Staghorn. Despite the
physical attractiveness of both Jenny and her escort, Staghorn began
to feel clammy in their presence. He had an impression of deep ill
health, a sense of unclean, almost reptilian lassitude.

"They get shorter all the time," said Jenny, and turned away as though
the conversation bored her. The man too had lost interest.

Staghorn stood ignored for a moment and then spoke bluntly.

"Who are the Atavars?"

The word produced the first genuine reaction. Jenny leaped to her feet.
The man turned red.

"Don't say that word!" Jenny said.

"I'm sorry. I'm a stranger."

"No one can be that much of a stranger!"

"It's indecent," the man said. He stood up and touched Jenny's arm. "I
feel my blood pounding. Let's go get married."

Jenny nodded and, with a cold glance at Staghorn, moved away with her
companion. Staghorn was tempted to follow and demand an answer to his
question when he saw Miss Terry approaching. Miss Terry was more likely
to have the information he needed, and in any case--since she was only
in her fifties--she was less than half of Jenny Cheever's age. He hoped
this would make a difference in her attitude. That she was capable
of emotion he already knew. Her expression, as she approached, was
disconsolate.

Staghorn bowed low before her and introduced himself. "Good afternoon,
Miss Terry. I'm a stranger to you but since you're a teacher by
profession, you may have heard of me. I'm Dr. Roger Staghorn." He
straightened, twisted his lips into a smile and waited for Miss Terry
to associate his name with those scientific achievements that had so
startled the world a hundred years earlier. To his chagrin Miss Terry
only gazed at him blankly and shook her head.

       *       *       *       *       *

"No," she murmured. Then tears formed in her eyes and she tried to move
on. Staghorn stopped her.

"Forgive me," he said. "I'm aware of your recent loss. Your pupil,
Paul."

Her tears dropped more freely. "Sooner or later I knew they'd get him.
The only child in town. And now I have nothing to do. Nothing at all!"

"They? Just who are they--the Atavars?"

Miss Terry turned pale. "Don't say it," she pleaded. "In time I'll
forget."

"But where have they taken Paul? And what will they do with him?"

"He'll die, of course." She spoke these words almost indifferently,
then wept copiously as she added, "But I'll live on with nothing to do!"

"Then why didn't someone stop them?" He gestured angrily at the
handsome young males wandering through the park. "All these men--why
don't they rescue Paul?"

This suggestion so shocked Miss Terry that she stopped weeping. "That's
impossible! There'd be violence. Someone might get killed!"

"They think of _that_ with a boy's life at stake?" Staghorn felt his
rage rising. He was an irascible man by nature and had controlled
himself so far only because he knew he was part of an illusion. The
sense of illusion was fading rapidly, however. The guiding principles
of morals and ethics were themselves abstractions and therefore
operated just as powerfully in an abstract universe. He grasped Miss
Terry by the arm.

"I'll go after him myself. Where do I find him?"

"You can't find him! If you follow they'll capture you too!"

"I'll chance that! Where have they gone?"

"I can't tell you! They might punish me!"

Staghorn shook her heartily, ignoring the fact that she was over
fifty. "Tell me! It so happens that besides Paul, they've captured Dr.
Clarence Peccary, and I'm responsible for his life!"

At this statement Miss Terry let out a cry of horror. "They've caught
Dr. Peccary? No! No!"

"They most certainly have. So hurry up and tell me--"

"We'll all die!" wailed Miss Terry. "We'll all die!"

"In that case it can't hurt you to tell me."

"The mountains!" cried Miss Terry. "High Canyon!"

It was with great difficulty that Staghorn forced directions from her.
The news of Peccary's capture had unsettled her entirely. But despite
the roughness with which he was forced to use her, no one came to her
rescue. Several young men and women gathered at a safe distance to
watch, but they did nothing to interfere.

       *       *       *       *       *

Staghorn finally elicited the information that High Canyon was several
miles north of town and could be reached by following a dirt road. To
his inquiry as to where he could rent a car, Miss Terry went blank
again. There were no cars. They had been abolished before Miss Terry
was born. She thought there might be one in the museum.

Staghorn glanced at his watch.

He'd already been in the transmitter thirty minutes. He had only two
and a half hours to get to High Canyon, rescue Dr. Peccary and Paul and
return to the square. He dared not cut it too fine. He'd have to be
back with a few minutes to spare.

So, after learning the location of the museum, he took off at a run.

It was evident that at some period in the past the town had gone
through a surge of prosperity, for there were several quite majestic
buildings whose cornerstones bore dates of the late twentieth century.
But it was also clear that during the last fifty years not only had
few new enterprises been started but the old ones had been allowed to
languish. The museum even lacked an attendant at the door--unless one
gave this title to the bust of Dr. Peccary which stood on a pedestal
just inside the entrance. The plaque beneath the bust noted that Dr.
Peccary had given the museum to the city in 1985 "to preserve for our
immortal posterity a true picture of the world of mortals."

In the seven and a half decades since, however, this true picture had
suffered badly.

In the absence of curtains and draperies, and in the nudeness of the
mannekins whose purpose could only have been to display twentieth
century costumes, Staghorn gained a hint as to where the populace got
at least a part of the rags they wore. He didn't pause to examine
details, however. A wall directory with a faded map of the building
had given him the location of the wing of twentieth century machines.
He headed there at once, passing by displays of tractors, bulldozers,
jackhammers and other commonplaces before reaching the automobiles.

There was an excellent selection of standard and sports models, all a
uniform gray under their coats of dust--and all of them out of gas.

After so long a time it was doubtful if any would have run anyway. He
had simply hoped that one lone attendant might have kept one in working
condition.

In the next room, however, he found the reward for his effort.
Bicycles. He chose a racing model.

A few minutes later he was pedaling rapidly northward on the dirt road
that led to High Canyon.


IV

Dr. Peccary could feel fingers probing at his sore head. A bit of damp
cloth or cotton was pressed against his upper lip. The sharp odor that
stabbed his nostrils made him jerk his head away and suck in his breath.

"Good. He's coming around."

Dr. Peccary opened his eyes. For a few seconds faces and objects swung
around him giddily, but finally the environment achieved stability. He
saw that he was in a log cabin, on a bunk. Seated in a chair beside him
was a man whose manner could belong only to a doctor. Standing behind
the doctor was the bearded man.

"He'll be all right," the doctor said, packing bottles and probes into
his little black bag.

Dr. Peccary sat up and touched the back of his head gingerly. It was
very, very sore. He'd never had an illusion quite like this before.
Besides, the illusion had persisted too long. How long had he been out?
Hours? Days? Good lord, had Staghorn deserted him?

The bearded man ushered the doctor out, locked the door and came back
to observe Peccary. He put a booted foot on the chair and leaned an
elbow on his knee.

"I hardly need tell you, Dr. Peccary," he said, "that this is the
happiest day of my life."

"But not of mine," Peccary responded sourly. "I doubt if you can make
it a bit worse by telling me what this is all about and what you plan
to do with me."

The bearded man showed surprise. "You don't know?"

"No! I don't know!" Peccary was losing his detachment.

The bearded man considered him thoughtfully. "I shouldn't have let the
doctor go so soon. Apparently you were hit harder than we thought.
On the other hand it's just possible, living as you have these last
seventy years locked up in your palace and isolated from the rest of
the world, that you've lost touch with what is going on."

"I've lost touch with a great many things. Obviously I'm a prisoner.
How long is this going to last?"

"Only until my demolition squad is ready. Then we take you to your
production plant where you produce the Y Hormone. There will be a gun
at your back, of course. You know the combination to get us safely past
the automatic guards. Ah, I've waited all my life for this! Once we're
in the plant, my men will do the rest."

"You're going to blow it up?"

"Absolutely!"

       *       *       *       *       *

"And what do you gain by that? The formula for the Y Hormone still
exists!"

The bearded man laughed. "Yes, I can see you've been out of touch with
the world. It's been thirty years since the country produced anyone
capable of working with that formula. That's when the last university
closed down--thirty years ago."

"That's shocking," said Dr. Peccary. "But my experiments showed
conclusively that the Y Hormone has no deleterious effect upon
intelligence. I took every precaution!"

"Nothing wrong with anyone's intelligence," said the bearded man,
"except that no one's under pressure to use it. When the future
stretches on indefinitely, it gets easier and easier to put things off
until tomorrow--even education--until finally it's put off forever.
There's only one man living who understands that formula."

"And who is that?"

The bearded man looked down at him hatefully. "Yourself, Dr. Peccary!
That's why we're so delighted to capture you--because now you'll never
use it again!"

Peccary stared at him aghast. "I understand now! You mean to steal
it. You mean to force it out of me and start producing the Y Hormone
yourself!"

This accusation resulted in a violent reaction from the bearded man. He
grasped Peccary by the lapels of his jacket and hauled him to his feet.
Peccary could feel the man's powerful hands trembling with rage.

"You fool! You utter imbecile! Don't you even yet know who we are?"

Peccary was so throttled by the man's clutch that he could only waggle
his head in the negative. The bearded man's face came close to his.

"We're mortals!" He flung Peccary back on the bunk contemptuously. "We
accept our allotted span of years and call it quits. But during that
time we live! We have to. It's all the time we have!" He glared at
Peccary a moment before resuming in a milder tone. "After we destroy
your production plant, Dr. Peccary, we're going to kill you. You might
as well know. It's the only way to make certain that the formula for
the Y Hormone will never be used again." Then he smiled. "But take
consolation. With the plant destroyed you'd gradually get old and die
anyway. For the brief period before we execute you, you might even
regain an appreciation for life." He bent suddenly, gripped Peccary's
wrist and hauled him to his feet again. "In fact, you might have
forgotten what life is. I'll refresh your memory. Come along!"

He dragged Peccary to the door, opened it and led him outside.

Peccary looked around. He found himself on the level floor of a canyon
whose vertical walls rose high on either side. He recognized the place
at once. Often when he was a boy he'd come here to camp overnight. It
had been a delightful wilderness with a year-round stream.

       *       *       *       *       *

The canyon had changed. Some forty cabins like the one he'd been in
were built in the shade of the southern cliff, and the canyon floor
was covered with green crops and pasture. He heard singing, laughter.
People were at work in the fields, children were building rock castles
at the base of the cliff. On a cabin porch two elderly men sat playing
checkers.

"The last of the mortals," said the bearded man. "If there are any
other colonies we don't know of them. But when you're gone, Dr.
Peccary, they'll be the first of a new race! You asked earlier what we
intended to do with the boy we kidnaped. There he is." And he pointed
toward the canyon wall.

Peccary looked and saw Paul climbing upward along crevices and ledges.
The bearded man cupped his hands to his mouth and shouted. "Paul! How
is it?"

The boy straightened on a rocky pinnacle and looked back. His face was
ecstatic. "I'm climbing!" he crowed. "I've never been so high! I'm
climbing all the way to the top!" He waved and clambered on.

"Once in a great while a child is born to one of the immortals," the
bearded man said. "If we find him in time we can save him."

Peccary watched the boy move upward along the cliff. "Then why was he
so terrified when you captured him?"

"Because he'd had it pounded into him that if the Atavars got him
he'd die. He will, too, eventually. Like any other mortal. But in the
meanwhile--" He broke off and turned on Peccary savagely. "You see,
there's one thing you didn't consider at all! The Y Hormone stops aging
and keeps people healthy, but it can't protect them from accidents. The
immortals can still die if they get hit by a train or fall overboard
in the middle of the ocean. A mortal can accept the possibility of
accidental death because he knows he's going to die anyway sooner
or later, but can't you see the psychological shock to the immortals
when one of them dies? A man who had the potential of living forever,
suddenly wiped out! It's like the end of the world. And so they started
eliminating hazards. Automobiles went first. Then planes and trains.
They weren't needed anyway, because people stopped traveling. To travel
is to court accident. But one precaution breeds another, and before
long people were avoiding all dangerous occupations. With immortality
at stake, even the smallest risk was too much. Planing mills, machine
shops, mines, smelters--bah! Name me an occupation that doesn't
occasionally entail some hazard. Even motherhood!"

       *       *       *       *       *

"But I anticipated the need for birth control! I had the plans all set
up."

"There was birth control all right, but not the way you planned it.
Ten years after your hormone went on the market the world had an extra
five billion people. For a few years they produced a surge of energy
until the older immortals started eliminating the hazards. After that,
starvation set in. Three-fourths of the population died. Your hormone
can't keep people from starving, either, and it was a shock from which
those who survived never recovered. Every new mouth to feed was a
threat. Childbirth practically stopped. But that left the remaining
immortals in a very soft position. For years now they've been existing
on the leftovers from civilization, finding shelter in the old houses,
ransacking the attics and closets of the dead for scraps of clothing,
daring to plant a few crops in areas where they'll grow with little
care. And after that--boredom."

He thrust an accusing finger at Peccary. "And you dared to use the
slogan, 'Time to achieve perfection!' I tell you, Dr. Peccary, the
source of man's courage and energy is the knowledge of death! Man was
meant to be mortal. We strive because we know the time is short. We
climb mountains, make love, descend to the depths of the sea and reach
for the stars because the certainty of death urges us on. It's the only
certainty the world had--and you would destroy it!"

Peccary quailed before the bearded man's ferocity. He was relieved when
his captor's attention was diverted by a party of horsemen who rode
up in neat order and stopped before their leader. Several horses were
loaded with explosives.

"We're ready, Sir," their spokesman said.

"Good," said the bearded man. "I see no reason to delay an instant."

An extra horse had been provided for Dr. Peccary. He was on the point
of being forcibly hoisted into the saddle when he was given a reprieve
by a diversion of another kind.

Approaching on the path through the center of the canyon, pedaling his
bicycle frantically, came--Staghorn!

       *       *       *       *       *

He rode up to the group and leapt from his seat, his face blue from
exertion. He'd been climbing all the way from town. He stood gasping
for breath while he dragged his big gold watch from his pocket and
consulted the time. He managed a groan. "Only thirty minutes left.
Miles to go! But it's down hill all the way; we can make it!" He shoved
his bicycle forward. "On the handlebars, Dr. Peccary, quick!"

Peccary would have liked nothing better. But his movement toward
Staghorn was stopped instantly by the men who were trying to put him on
his horse. "They're going to kill me!" he cried. "They're going to blow
up my factory and kill me!"

"No, no!" said Staghorn. "That can't be. The consequences would be
disastrous." He turned to the bearded leader. "Look, Sir, I have no
time to explain, and I'm sure you wouldn't believe me even if I did.
All of you are illusions! This entire situation is nothing but a
mathematical probability. And so I insist that you release my friend,
Dr. Peccary, at once!"

The bearded man was so amazed by this request that he forgot to take
offense. He gaped at Staghorn. "Who are you? I can't imagine an
immortal risking himself on a bicycle!"

"At this moment I'm desperately mortal, and so is Dr. Peccary!"

"Nonsense. Dr. Peccary is a hundred and forty-two years old!"

"I've told you this situation has no existence in reality!"

The bearded man stomped the ground. "I've been living on this planet
fifty-five years. I know reality when I see it! And what's more, I'm
beginning to think you _are_ one of the immortals. Even an immortal
might show some courage when he knows he's going to be deprived of the
Y Hormone."

"If you must know, I'm Dr. Roger Staghorn! I can see that there's
industry and education in this canyon and so it's possible you've heard
of me. I have quite a record of scientific achievements back in the
twentieth century."

       *       *       *       *       *

At this announcement the bearded man goggled at him, then threw back
his head and laughed uproariously. "You couldn't have picked a worse
masquerade. Dr. Roger Staghorn died in 1994!"

"I can't help that I'm Staghorn!"

The bearded man stopped laughing and thrust his face forward
threateningly. "You're a fraud! Because it so happens that _I'm_
Staghorn!"

"You? Staghorn?"

"I'm Henry Staghorn, great-grandson of the real Dr. Roger Staghorn!"

"Impossible. I have no intention of ever getting married!"

"Dr. Roger Staghorn married when he founded the Atavars, ninety years
ago! He saw the need of leaving mortal offspring and sacrificed himself
to that end. And he's buried in the cliff over there. Furthermore, he
became Dr. Peccary's most bitter enemy. If he were alive today, he'd
be tying the knot for Peccary's neck instead of trying to rescue him."
The bearded man drew a revolver from inside his jacket. "I think I'll
execute you here and now!"

Peccary all but fainted. If Staghorn were killed all hope was gone. But
Staghorn threw up a commanding hand.

"Stop, Henry! What you say may be perfectly true from your peculiar
viewpoint. But I'm still Roger Staghorn! Are you going to shoot your
own great-grandfather?"

Staghorn's tone, rather than his words, made the bearded man pause. He
turned to a companion.

And in that instant Staghorn moved. After all, he was slightly younger
and more agile than his great-grandson. He leapt onto his bicycle,
shouting at Peccary, "Turn around!"

Peccary whirled and sprang in the air as Staghorn aimed the bicycle
between his legs. He landed neatly on the handlebars, and with
simultaneous kicks sent the men on either side sprawling. Then he and
Staghorn were off down the canyon.

Behind them they could hear the thundering hoofs as the horsemen
started in pursuit.

"Go, Staghorn, go!" Peccary shouted.

The race would have been lost at once except for the downhill grade.
But because of it, Peccary's added weight was a help instead of a
hindrance. Shots rang out; bullets bounced from the rocks on either
side.

They made it out of the canyon's mouth and the grade increased on the
long straightaway toward town. Staghorn's feet spun as they darted
downward, maintaining their lead in front of the pursuing horsemen. The
town loomed ahead of them, closer and closer until at last they sped
into a street where the buildings gave them protection from bullets.

The bicycle slowed. They were on level ground again. Staghorn skidded
around a corner and stopped so suddenly that Dr. Peccary was propelled
forward and landed on his feet at the mouth of an alley. Abandoning the
bicycle, both men charged into it.

"The square!" Staghorn gasped. "I'm focused on the square!" He hauled
out his watch as he ran. Only seven minutes remained.

       *       *       *       *       *

The deep-throated alarm whistle was sounding over the town. Its
inhabitants must have sighted the approach of the Atavars for they
were scurrying into buildings and basements, leaving the way clear for
Peccary and Staghorn. They emerged from the alley and turned left for a
block, then doubled back as they were sighted by the searching horsemen.

The hue and cry was on again, but Peccary's familiarity with his home
town served them well until they came within sight of the square. Then
they stopped in dismay and ducked into a doorway.

Across the street in the center of the little park, as though divining
that it must be their destination, was Staghorn's great-grandson
and three of his men. Their position enabled them to watch all four
approaches to the square at the same time.

Staghorn tugged out his watch again. Two minutes. They had to be in
focus! A second late and they'd be locked forever. He watched the
second hand creep around the dial.

"We have to chance it," he said. "When I start running, run with me!"

The second hand crept on. A minute left. Staghorn judged the distance
from their hiding place to the grassy plot where the bearded man was
standing. About seventy-five yards. Could he do seventy-five yards in
ten seconds? Could Peccary? Thirty seconds left ... twenty-five ...
twenty. He'd never gone through such a painful count-down ... fifteen
seconds.

"Ready, Dr. Peccary. It's now or never."

Thirteen ... twelve ... eleven ... "Go!"

Staghorn burst from his hiding place with Peccary at his heels. They
dashed for the square. They were over the curb and into the street
before the men in the park saw their approach and let out cries of
triumph.

"Dip and weave, Dr. Peccary! Dip and weave!"

They dipped and wove, while bullets ripped at their clothing. They
were running right into the fire, making better targets at every
stride. Staghorn ran with his watch in his hand, and never had time and
distance diminished so slowly.

Seven seconds, six, five, and they were still alive and across the
street. Four seconds, three, two.

They were over the park and onto the grass. A bullet crashed into
Staghorn's leg and he fell, diving forward.

"Got him!" cried his great-grandson. "Now get Peccary!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Three shots rang out as one. But at some point in the bullets' flight
toward Peccary and Staghorn, the square and everything in it vanished.

Staghorn found himself sitting in Humanac's transmitter unit.

The time clock had functioned. He was disengaged.

He lifted the helmet from his head and stumbled from the cell, drawing
a trouser leg up to examine his leg. It seemed that he could detect a
scar. Then he turned and helped Dr. Peccary from the other transmitter.
Both men stepped toward the console to look at Humanac's screen.

It was still focused on the little park. The bearded man and his
companions were now exchanging glances of consternation. After a moment
the bearded man wet his lips. "Maybe he was right," he said in awed
tones. "No one but my great-grandfather could ever do a trick like
that. And maybe what he said is true. It's all illusion. We're nothing
but mathematical probabilities!"

At this point Staghorn hauled down the master switch. The screen went
dead as Humanac's power was shut off.

Some twenty minutes later he had finished draining Dr. Peccary's sample
of the Y Hormone from Humanac's analyzer and had thoroughly cleansed
the computer of any last traces of it. He handed the little bottle of
the hormone back to Dr. Peccary.

"There," he said. "As far as Humanac is concerned, it's as though it
never was. Do as you wish."

Dr. Peccary looked at the bottle sadly. It was worth millions.
Billions.

Then slowly he moved to a laboratory sink and poured the contents of
the bottle down the drain.

"I can't help wondering," mused Staghorn, "of whose computer we're a
part right now--slight factors in the chain of causation that started
God knows when and will end...."

"When someone pulls the switch," said Dr. Peccary.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Immortals, by David Duncan

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE IMMORTALS ***

***** This file should be named 51801.txt or 51801.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/1/8/0/51801/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg EBook of Perfect Answer, by L.J. Stecher

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Perfect Answer

Author: L.J. Stecher

Release Date: March 17, 2016 [EBook #51482]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PERFECT ANSWER ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                            PERFECT ANSWER

                         By L. J. STECHER, JR.

                      Illustrated by DICK FRANCIS

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                   Galaxy Science Fiction June 1958.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]




             Getting there may be half the fun ... but it
            is also all of a society's chance of survival!


"As one god to another--let's go home," Jack Bates said.

Bill Farnum raised a space-gloved hand in negligent acknowledgment to
a hastily kneeling native, and shook his head at Bates. "Let's try
Deneb--it's almost in line on the way back--and then we can call it
quits."

"But I want to get back and start making some profit out of this. The
Galaxy is full of _Homo sapiens_. We've hit the jackpot first trip out.
Let's hurry on home and cash in."

"We need more information. This is too much of a good thing--it doesn't
make sense. I know there isn't much chance of finding anything out by
stopping at one more solar system. But it won't delay us more than a
few weeks, and it won't hurt to try."

"Yeah," said Bates. "But what's in it for us? And what if we find an
inhabited planet? You know the chances are about two to one that we
will. That'll make thirteen we've found on this trip. Why risk bad
luck?"

"You're no more superstitious than I am," said Farnum. "You just want
to get back Earthside. I'll tell you what. We'll toss a coin for it."

Bates gestured futilely toward his coverall pocket, and then
remembered he was wearing a spacesuit as a precaution against possible
contamination from the natives.

"And we'll use one of _my_ coins this time," said Farnum, noticing the
automatic motion. "I want to have a chance."

The coin dropped in Farnum's favor, and their two-man scout ship hurled
itself into space.

       *       *       *       *       *

Farnum operated the compact computer, aligning the ship's velocity
vector precisely while the stars could still be seen. Bates controlled
the engines, metering their ravenous demand for power just this side of
destructive detonation, while the ship sucked energy from space--from
the adjacent universe on the other side of Limbo. Finally the computer
chimed, relays snicked, and the ship slid into the emptiness of Limbo
as the stars winked out.

With two trained men working as a team with the computer and the
elaborate engine room controls, and with a certain amount of luck, the
ship would drop back into normal space a couple of weeks later, close
beside their target.

"Well, that's that," said Farnum, relaxing and wiping the perspiration
off his forehead. "We're back once again in the nothingness of nowhere.
As I recall, it's your week for K.P. Where's the coffee?"

"Coming right up," said Bates. "But you won't like it. It's the last of
the 'God-food' the Korite priests made for us."

Farnum shuddered. "Pour it out and make some fresh. With a skillet, you
stink, but you're a thousand times better than Korites."

"Thanks," Bates said, getting busy. "It was the third place we stopped
that they were such good cooks, wasn't it?"

"Nope. Our third stop was the Porandians. They tried to kill us--called
us 'Devil spawn from the stars.' You're thinking of the fourth stop;
the Balanites."

Bates shrugged. "It's kind of hard to keep them all straight. Either
they fall on their knees and worship us, or they try to kill us without
even asking questions. Maybe it's lucky they're all so primitive."

"It may be lucky, but it doesn't add up. More than half the stars we
visit have planets that can support human life. And every one that can
does. Once there must have been an interstellar empire. So why are
all their civilizations so backward? They aren't primitive--they're
decadent. And why do they all have such strong feelings--one way or the
exact opposite--about people from the stars?"

"Isn't that why you want to try one more system?" asked Bates. "To give
us another chance to get some answers? Here's your coffee. Try to drink
it quietly. I'm going to get some shuteye."

       *       *       *       *       *

The trip through the Limbo between adjacent universes passed
uneventfully, as always. The computer chimed again on schedule, and a
quick check by Farnum showed the blazing sun that suddenly appeared was
Deneb, as advertised. Seventeen planets could be counted, and the fifth
seemed to be Earth type. They approached it with the easy skill of long
practice and swung into orbit about it.

"This is what we've been looking for!" exclaimed Farnum, examining
the planet through a telescope. "They've got big cities and dams and
bridges--they're civilized. Let's put the ship down."

"Wait up," said Bates. "What if they've got starman-phobia? Remember,
they're people, just like us; and with people, civilization and
weapons go together."

"I think you've got it backwards. If they hate us, we can probably get
away before they bring up their big artillery. But what if they love
us? They might want to keep us beside them forever."

Bates nodded. "I'm glad you agree with me. Let's get out of here.
Nobody but us knows of the beautiful, profitable planets we've found,
all ready to become part of a Terran Empire. And if we don't get back
safe and sound, nobody _will_ know. The information we've got is worth
a fortune to us, and I want to be alive to collect it."

"Sure. But we've got the job of trying to find out why all those
planets reverted to barbarism. This one hasn't; maybe the answer's
here. There's no use setting up an empire if it won't last."

"It'll last long enough to keep you and me on top of the heap."

"That's not good enough. I want my kids--when I have them--to have
their chances at the top of the heap too."

"Oh, all right. We'll flip a coin, then."

"We already did. You may be a sharp dealer, but you'd never welch on a
bet. We're going down."

Bates shrugged. "You win. Let's put her down beside that big city over
there--the biggest one, by the seashore."

As they approached the city, they noticed at its outskirts a large
flat plain, dotted with gantries. "Like a spaceport," suggested Bill.
"That's our target."

They landed neatly on the tarmac and then sat there quietly, waiting to
see what would happen.

       *       *       *       *       *

A crowd began to form. The two men sat tensely at their controls, but
the throng clustering about the base of the ship showed no hostility.
They also showed no reverence but, rather, a carefree interest and
joyful welcome.

"Well," said Farnum at last, "looks like we might as well go outside
and ask them to take us to their leader."

"I'm with you as usual," said Bates, starting to climb into his
spacesuit. "Weapons?"

"I don't think so. We can't stop them if they get mad at us, and they
look friendly enough. We'll start off with the 'let's be pals' routine."

Bates nodded. "After we learn the language. I always hate this part--it
moves so slowly. You'd think there'd be some similarity among the
tongues on different planets, wouldn't you? But each one's entirely
different. I guess they've all been isolated too long."

The two men stepped out on the smooth plain, to be instantly surrounded
by a laughing, chattering crowd. Farnum stared around in bewilderment
at the variety of dress the crowd displayed. There were men and women
in togas, in tunics, in draped dresses and kilts, in trousers and
coats. Others considered a light cloak thrown over the shoulders to be
adequate. There was no uniformity of style or custom.

"You pick me a boss-man out of this bunch," he muttered to Bates.

Finally a couple of young men, glowing with health and energy, came
bustling through the crowd with an oblong box which they set down in
front of the Earthmen. They pointed to the box and then back at Farnum
and Bates, laughing and talking as they did so.

"What do you suppose they want us to do?" Farnum asked.

One of the young men clapped his hands happily and reached down to
touch the box. "What do you suppose they want us to do?" asked the box
distinctly.

"Oh. A recording machine. Probably to help with language lessons. Might
as well help them out."

       *       *       *       *       *

Farnum and Bates took turns talking at the box for half an hour. Then
the young man nodded, laughed, clapped his hands again, and the two
men carried it away. The crowd went with them, waving merrily as they
departed.

Bates shrugged his shoulders and went back into the ship, with Farnum
close behind.

A few hours after sunrise the following morning, the crowd returned,
as gay and carefree as before, led by the two young men who had carried
the box. Each of these two now had a small case, about the size of a
camera, slung by a strap across one brawny shoulder.

As the terrestrials climbed out to meet them, the two men raised their
hands and the crowd discontinued its chatter, falling silent except for
an occasional tinkle of surprised laughter.

"Welcome," said the first young man clearly. "It is a great pleasure
for us to have our spaceport in use again. It has been many generations
since any ships have landed on it."

Farnum noticed that the voice came from the box. "Thank you for your
very kind welcome," he said. "I hope that your traffic will soon
increase. May we congratulate you, by the way, on the efficiency of
your translators?"

"Thanks," laughed the young man. "But there was nothing to it. We just
asked the Oracle and he told us what we had to do to make them."

"May we meet your--Oracle?"

"Oh, sure, if you want to. But later on. Now it's time for a party. Why
don't you take off those clumsy suits and come along?"

"We don't dare remove our spacesuits. They protect us from any disease
germs you may have, and you from any we may have. We probably have no
resistance to each others' ailments."

"The Oracle says we have nothing that will hurt you. And we're going
to spray you with this as soon as you get out of your suits. Then you
won't hurt any of us." He held up a small atomizer.

Farnum glanced at Bates, who shrugged and nodded. They uneasily
unfastened their spacesuits and stepped out of them, wearing only their
light one-piece coveralls, and got sprayed with a pleasant-smelling
mist.

The party was a great success. The food was varied and delicious.
The liquors were sparkling and stimulating, without unpleasant
after-effects. The women were uninhibited.

When a native got tired, he just dropped down onto the soft grass, or
onto an even softer couch, and went to sleep. The Earthmen finally did
the same.

       *       *       *       *       *

They awoke the following morning within minutes of each other, feeling
comfortable and relaxed. Bates shook his head experimentally. "No
hangover," he muttered in surprise.

"No one ever feels bad after a party," said one of their guides, who
had slept nearby. "The Oracle told us what to do, when we asked him."

"Quite a fellow, your Oracle," commented Bates. "Does he answer you in
riddles, like most Oracles?"

The guide was shocked. "The Oracle answers any questions promptly and
completely. He _never_ talks in riddles."

"Can we go to see him now?" asked Farnum.

"Certainly. Come along. I'll take you to the Hall of the Oracle."

The Oracle appeared to live in a building of modest size, in the center
of a tremendous courtyard. The structure that surrounded the courtyard,
in contrast, was enormous and elaborate, dominating the wildly
architectured city. It was, however, empty.

"Scholars used to live in this building, they tell me," said one of
their guides, gesturing casually. "They used to come here to learn from
the Oracle. But there's no sense in learning a lot of stuff when the
Oracle has always got all the answers anyway. So now the building is
empty. The big palace was built back in the days when we used to travel
among the stars, as you do now."

"How long ago was that?" asked Farnum.

"Oh, I don't know. A few thousand years--a few hundred years--the
Oracle can tell you if you really want to know."

Bates raised an eyebrow. "And how do you know you'll always be given
the straight dope?"

The guide looked indignant. "The Oracle _always_ tells the truth."

"Yes," Bates persisted, "but how do you _know_?"

"The Oracle told us so, of course. Now why don't you go in and find out
for yourselves? We'll wait out here. We don't have anything to ask him."

       *       *       *       *       *

Bates and Farnum went into the building and found themselves in a
small, pleasant room furnished with comfortable chairs and sofas.

"Good morning," said a well-modulated voice. "I have been expecting
you."

"You are the Oracle?" asked Farnum, looking around curiously.

"The name that the people of this planet have given me translates most
accurately as 'Oracle'," said the voice.

"But are you actually an Oracle?"

"My principal function, insofar as human beings--that is, _Homo
sapiens_--are concerned, is to give accurate answers to all questions
propounded me. Therefore, insofar as humans are concerned, I am
actually an Oracle."

"Then you have another function?"

"My principal function, insofar as the race that made me is concerned,
is to act as a weapon."

"Oh," said Bates. "Then you are a machine?"

"I am a machine," agreed the voice.

"The people who brought us here said that you always tell them the
truth. I suppose that applies when you are acting as an Oracle, instead
of as a weapon?"

"On the contrary," said the voice blandly. "I function as a weapon by
telling the truth."

"That doesn't make sense," protested Bates.

The machine paused for a moment before replying. "This will take
a little time, gentlemen," it said, "but I am sure that I can
convince you. Why don't you sit down and be comfortable? If you want
refreshments, just ask for them."

"Might as well," said Bates, sitting down in an easy chair. "How about
giving us some Korite God-food?"

"If you really want that bad a brew of coffee, I can make it for you,
of course," said the voice, "but I am sure you would prefer some of
better quality."

Farnum laughed. "Yes, please. Some good coffee, if you don't mind."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Now," said the Oracle, after excellent coffee had been produced, "it
is necessary for me to go back into history a few hundred thousand of
your years. At that time, the people who made me entered this galaxy
on one of their periodic visits of routine exploration, and contacted
your ancestors. The race that constructed me populates now, as it did
then, the Greater Magellanic Cloud.

"Frankly, the Magellanic race was appalled at what they found. In the
time since their preceding visit, your race had risen from the slime
of your mother planet and was on its way toward stars. The speed of
your development was unprecedented in millions of years of history. By
their standards, your race was incredibly energetic, incredibly fecund,
incredibly intelligent, unbelievably warlike, and almost completely
depraved.

"Extrapolation revealed that within another fifty thousand of your
years, you would complete the population of this galaxy and would be
totally unstoppable.

"Something had to be done, fast. There were two obvious solutions
but both were unacceptable to my Makers. The first was to assume
direct control over your race and to maintain that rule indefinitely,
until such time as you changed your natures sufficiently to become
civilizable. The expenditure of energy would be enormous and the
results probably catastrophic to your race. No truly civilized people
could long contemplate such a solution.

"The second obvious answer was to attempt to extirpate you from this
universe as if you were a disease--as, in a sense, you are. Because
your depravity was not total or necessarily permanent, this solution
was also abhorrent to my Makers and was rejected.

"What was needed was a weapon that would keep operating without direct
control by my People, which would not result in any greater destruction
or harm to humans than was absolutely necessary; and one which would
cease entirely to operate against you if you changed sufficiently to
become civilizable--to become good neighbors to my Makers.

"The final solution of the Magellanic race was to construct several
thousand spaceships, each containing an elaborate computer, constructed
so as to give accurate answers throughout your galaxy. I am one of
those ships. We have performed our function in a satisfactory manner
and will continue to do so as long as we are needed."

"And that makes you a weapon?" asked Bates incredulously. "I don't get
it."

       *       *       *       *       *

Farnum felt a shiver go through him. "I see it. The concept is
completely diabolical."

"It's not diabolical at all," answered the Oracle. "When you become
capable of civilization, we can do you no further harm at all. We will
cease to be a weapon at that time."

"You mean you'll stop telling the truth at that time?" asked Bates.

"We will continue to function in accordance with our design," answered
the voice, "but it will no longer do you harm. Incidentally, your
phrase 'telling the truth' is almost meaningless. We answer all
questions in the manner most completely understandable to you, within
the framework of your language and your understanding, and of the
understanding and knowledge of our Makers. In the objective sense, what
we answer is not necessarily the Truth; it is merely the truest form of
the answer that we can state in a manner that you can understand."

"And you'll answer any question at all?" asked Bates in some excitement.

"With one or two exceptions. We will not, for example, tell you how we
may be destroyed."

Bates stood up and began pacing the floor. "Then whoever possesses you
can be the most powerful man in the Universe!"

"No. Only in this galaxy."

"That's good enough for me!"

"Jack," said Farnum urgently, "let's get out of here. I want to talk to
you."

"In a minute, in a minute," said Bates impatiently. "I've got one more
question." He turned to face the wall from which the disembodied voice
appeared to emanate. "Is it possible to arrange it so that you would
answer only one man's questions--mine, for example?"

"I can tell you how to arrange it so that I will respond to only your
questions--for so long as you are alive."

"Come on," pleaded Farnum. "I've got to talk to you right now."

"Okay," said Bates, smiling. "Let's go."

       *       *       *       *       *

When they were back in their ship, Farnum turned desperately to Bates.
"Can't you see what a deadly danger that machine is to us all? We've
got to warn Earth as fast as we can and get them to quarantine this
planet--and any other planets we find that have Oracles."

"Oh, no, you don't," said Bates. "You aren't getting the chance to have
the Oracle all to yourself. With that machine, we can rule the whole
galaxy. We'll be the most powerful people who ever lived! It's sure
lucky for us that you won the toss of the coin and we stopped here."

"But don't you see that the Oracle will destroy Earth?"

"Bushwah. You heard it say it can only destroy people who aren't
civilized. It said that it's a spaceship, so I'll bet we can get it to
come back to Earth with us, and tell us how we can be the only ones who
can use it."

"We've got to leave here right away--without asking it any more
questions."

Bates shook his head. "Quit clowning."

"I never meant anything more in my life. Once we start using that
machine--if we ask it even one question to gain advantage for
ourselves--Earth's civilization is doomed. Can't you see that's what
happened to those other planets we visited? Can't you see what is
happening to this planet we're on now?"

"No, I can't," answered Bates stubbornly. "The Oracle said there are
only a few thousand like him. You could travel through space for
hundreds of years and never be lucky enough to find one. There can't be
an Oracle on every planet we visited."

"There wouldn't have to be," said Farnum. "There must be hundreds of
possible patterns--all of them destructive in the presence of greed
and laziness and lust for power. For example, a planet--maybe this
one--gets space travel. It sets up colonies on several worlds. It's
expanding and dynamic. Then it finds an Oracle and takes it back to its
own world. With all questions answered for it, the civilization stops
being dynamic and starts to stagnate. It stops visiting its colonies
and they drift toward barbarism.

"Later," Farnum went on urgently, "somebody else reaches the stars,
finds the planet with the Oracle--and takes the thing back home. Can
you imagine what will happen to these people on this world if they
lose their Oracle? Their own learning and traditions and way of life
have been destroyed--just take a look at their anarchic clothing
and architecture. The Oracle is the only thing that keeps them
going--downhill--and makes sure they don't start back again."

"It won't happen that way to us," Bates argued. "We won't let the
Oracle get into general use, so Earth won't ever learn to depend on it.
I'm going to find out from it how to make it work for the two of us
alone. You can come along and share the gravy or not, as you choose. I
don't care. But you aren't going to stop me."

Bates turned and strode out of the ship.

       *       *       *       *       *

Farnum pounded his fist into his palm in despair, and then ran to a
locker. Taking out a high-power express rifle, he loaded it carefully
and stepped out through the airlock. Bates showed clearly in his
telescopic sights, still walking toward the Hall of the Oracle. Farnum
fired at the legs, but he wasn't that good a shot; the bullet went
through the back.

Farnum jittered between bringing Bates back and taking off as fast as
the ship could go. The body still lay there, motionless; there was
nothing he could do for the Oracle's first Earth victim--the first
and the last, he swore grimly. He had to speed home and make them
understand the danger before they found another planet with an Oracle,
so that they could keep clear of its deadly temptations. The Magellanic
race could be outwitted yet, in spite of their lethal cleverness.

Then he felt a sudden icy chill along his spine. Alone, he could never
operate the spaceship--and Bates was dead. He was trapped on the planet.

For hours, he tried to think of some way of warning Earth. It was
imperative that he get back. There had to be a way.

He realized finally that there was only one solution to his problem.
He sighed shudderingly and walked slowly from the spaceship toward the
Hall of the Oracle, past Bates' body.

"One question, though," he muttered to himself. "Only one."





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Perfect Answer, by L.J. Stecher

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PERFECT ANSWER ***

***** This file should be named 51482.txt or 51482.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/1/4/8/51482/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg EBook of Matchmaker, by Charles L. Fontenay

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll
have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using
this ebook.



Title: Matchmaker

Author: Charles L. Fontenay

Release Date: December 3, 2019 [EBook #60837]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MATCHMAKER ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                              MATCHMAKER

                        By CHARLES L. FONTENAY

               _Ask a sensible question and you're sure
              to get a sensible answer--remembering that
              one man's sense may be a machine's poison!_

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                Worlds of If Science Fiction, May 1960.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


Jasso laid the bulky report on his superior's desk.

"No one living can solve the problem," he said.

Tern stared at him quizzically and leaned back in the cushioned chair
behind his desk.

"That's encouraging," Tern said with a wry smile. "The second
generation?"

"The probabilities are high. The most likely father is a man named Lao
Protik, a psycho-artist living in Nuyork."

"The mother?"

Jasso grinned, a flashing grin in a dark face. He sank into a chair,
pulled out a cigarette pack and offered one to Tern. The older man
shook his head, fishing in his pocket for an old-fashioned pipe. Jasso
clicked out a cigarette and drew deeply on it.

"That's one of the fascinating angles about dealing with the
Calculator," he said. "We combined the fifty most probable fathers,
including Lao, with the fifty most probable mothers. Believe it or not,
we drew an absolute blank. They just don't jibe at all."

"Not too surprising," said Tern. "It's happened before. But I gather
you've already decided to work with this psycho-artist. Why?"

"Lao's so far ahead of the rest, both men and women, it's the only
thing to do. And, since life is full of little surprises, we found
the probability highest if Lao marries a woman whose own separate
probability rating is close to zero." Jasso consulted his notes
and added: "She's a language teacher named Grida Mattin, living in
Southgate, Tennessee."

"You're pretty sure these results are right?" asked Tern.

"I've checked every angle I could think of," replied Jasso carefully.
"Of course, there's always the possibility that two near-zero
probabilities would add up better, when combined. But the probability
rating for marriage between these two is very high--you can see for
yourself when you check the figures. I think it's the best we'll find."

"It would be so much simpler if we had a high probability among people
in this generation," said Tern thoughtfully. "Arranging a marriage
between two strangers is a ticklish business."

"It's been done before," said Jasso. "I'll put a team of agents to work
on it right away."

       *       *       *       *       *

There were millions of cards--if you could call things the size of a
bedsheet "cards." Each punched with holes like a swiss cheese, they
filled one of the Calculator's most strategic banks. They represented
every man, woman and child in the civilized world.

Through them, the course of history could be guided, the advancement
of civilization accelerated. By racing through the backgrounds and
capabilities of every person in the United Nations, the Calculator
could find the best one to do any job, to solve any problem.

Lao Protik, as he strolled into his swank Nuyork apartment building
that July evening, was completely unaware that the Calculator had
pointed a finger at him. Life flowed smoothly for him. Not a worry
darkened the horizon. His annual salary from Consolidated Ads was five
hundred thousand dols--a comfortable thirty thousand after taxes--and
he maintained three mistresses in separate apartments.

In the lobby, he paused to open his mailbox. Two letters fell out into
his hands; he tore the envelopes neatly across the end.

The first was an advertisement for the 2125 model of the Sky Swallow
convertible helicar. He crumpled it and tossed it into a potted palm.

He grunted in surprise as he read the second one.

"Vr. Lao Protik," he read. "Our firm has been impressed with your
accomplishments and growing reputation as a psycho-artist. We are in a
position to offer you employment at a salary of one hundred thousand
dols annually. Our representative, Vr. Casto Roche, will call on you in
a few days to discuss this offer with you."

The letter bore the illegible scrawl of someone who signed himself as
president of Colorvue Publicity, Inc. Lao had never heard of the firm.

Lao's lips curled and this missive followed the first one into the
potted palm. He felt a momentary irritation at the audacity of anyone
offering him a mere hundred thousand dols, then let the entire matter
slip from his mind.

Softly whistling the refrain of the latest hit tune, "The Clouds of
Venus Can't Come Between Us," he caught the elevator and ascended to
his last untroubled night for a long time to come.

       *       *       *       *       *

A terse memorandum was waiting for Lao at his office the next morning.
It was not the sort of thing any employee of Consolidated Ads could
ignore--not even a Class A psycho-artist who was an officer in his
union. A worried frown creasing his normally smooth forehead, Lao
hurried down the corridor to the plush office of Mavo Caprin, president
of the firm.

Caprin was in no amiable mood. He grunted at Lao's somewhat querulous
greeting. He kept his nose buried in papers, puffing ominously on a fat
cigar for several minutes before looking up and waving Lao to a seat.

"Perhaps you can explain these, Protik," said Caprin sharply, waving
a thick fistful of letters. Lao leaned over to take them, and glanced
through several of them.

The phrases that met his eyes astounded and outraged him.

They were such words as "this insolent effrontery," "the unwarranted
audacity of the man," "a deliberate scheme to further rip away the
fabric of our tottering moral code"--all applied to his own work!

"I can't explain them because I don't know what they are talking
about, Voter Caprin," said Lao.

"They're talking about these," replied Caprin. With the flourish of a
magician taking a rabbit out of a hat, he produced a sheaf of Lao's
original paintings from his desk drawer.

Lao riffled through them. At first glance, he saw nothing wrong.
Then he looked more closely, and began to compare them with specific
complaints in the letters.

His face flushed bright red with anger.

Only one in a hundred readers of the advertisements that carried Lao
Protik's artwork would have noticed, but the complaints were justified!
The melange which was a competent psycho-artist's painting was
carefully confused to achieve a specific psychological objective--in
Lao Protik's work, to make people want to buy the products sponsored by
Consolidated Ads. But in these paintings the psychological impact had
been distorted cleverly. The psycho-art had been turned into effective
propaganda for polygamy!

"Somebody has altered my work," said Lao firmly. "I demand a thorough
check of every artist on the staff."

Caprin shook his head. "That won't be necessary. I've had these
paintings checked by experts, and they all agree this is your original
work."

       *       *       *       *       *

"That's outrageous!" exclaimed Lao. "What 'experts' told you such lies?"

"It doesn't matter," said Caprin, a bit wearily now. "I don't like to
do it after such a long association, Lao, but Consolidated Ads has a
reputation to maintain. We can't take sides in politics. We have to let
you go."

Lao stared at him. Then he hurled paintings and letters in Caprin's
face and stalked to the door. Halfway out of the office, he turned and
shouted furiously:

"The Psycho-Artists Guild will have something to say about this,
Caprin!"

"I don't think so," Caprin retorted mildly, rubbing a bruised cheek.

It wasn't long before Lao realized the significance of that parting
remark. His few personal belongings jammed into his briefcase, he
emerged on the roof of the huge Consolidated Ads building and looked
around for a helicab. The cabstands were empty at the moment. Waiting
under an awning, he dropped a dime into a newspaper vending machine. It
clucked and ejected the noon edition of the _Star_ into his hands.

A good-sized headline on Page One proclaimed: "Art Union Ejects
Protik." His eyes bulging slightly, Lao read swiftly:

    In a specially called meeting of its executive committee, the
    Psycho-Artists Guild this morning revoked the membership of its
    second vice-president, Lao Protik, chief psycho-artist for
    Consolidated Ads.

    Officers of the union refused to make public the reason for
    Protik's ejection, but there were reports that some connection
    with the notorious Polygamy League was involved. Protik could
    not be reached for comment immediately, and the switchboard
    operator at Consolidated Ads said she had instructions not
    to ring his office.

       *       *       *       *       *

Unshaven and bleary-eyed, Lao argued plaintively over the telephone
with his old friend, Majo Hobel, personnel chief at Autovance
Advertising. Hobel had tried several times in the past to woo Lao from
Consolidated Ads.

"It's no good, Lao," said Hobel. "You've been blackballed."

"But it's all a pack of lies, Majo!" cried Lao. "You know the inside of
the field. How about the foreign firms?" Anything outside of Nuyork was
"foreign."

"It's the same in Kahgo and all over. Sorry, Lao."

Cursing, Lao slammed down the receiver and dialed the number of Tinna,
his favorite mistress. A voice he recognized as Tinna's answered.

"Tinna," he began, "this is Lao...."

"She isn't here," said Tinna frigidly. The telephone clicked in his ear.

Lao's shoulders drooped. He put the phone in its cradle and, without
much hope, prepared to dial Phreda, another mistress. It buzzed at him
before he could begin.

He answered it.

"Voter Protik, there's a gentleman in the lobby to see you," said the
apartment house operator.

"I don't want to see any more reporters!" shouted Lao angrily.

"This isn't a reporter, sir. He says he's a representative of Colorvue
Publicity."

"Never heard of it," growled Lao. "But send him up."

He had no time to shave, but he washed his face and tried to make
himself a little more presentable before the apartment buzzer sounded.
He admitted an elderly man with a gray mustache, who had the well-fed
air of a corporation executive.

"Voter Protik, I am Roche of Colorvue Publicity," his visitor
introduced himself. "You received our letter several days ago?"

Lao searched his memory. Vaguely he recalled such a letter and his
hopes began to rise. Wasn't it something about offering him a job?

He asked Roche.

"That's correct, sir," replied Roche. "A hundred thousand dols a year,
one-quarter payable in advance."

"You may not want me now," said Lao gloomily. He had no scruples about
putting over a sharp business deal, but any contract he might draw
would be invalid if he withheld information.

"We are aware of your recent difficulties," said Roche sympathetically.
"I wish to assure you we do not believe the charges that you are
associated with the Polygamy League. Also you may wish to know that my
firm, while a small one, is a reputable one. A check of the Business
Practices Agency will prove that to you."

"I'm not a member of the Psycho-Artists Guild any more," Lao reminded
him bitterly, "to say nothing of having been blackballed by all major
firms and abandoned by my three mistresses."

"We have no union contract, and your personal life is your own,"
answered Roche with a slight smile. "Your known ability is sufficient
for us. There is one thing, however. Your work will not be in Nuyork,
but in Southgate, a small town in Tennessee. If you see fit to accept
our offer, we will arrange in advance for your quarters there. There
will be no cost to you."

"I hate to leave Nuyork," said Lao slowly. "And I'm frank to say that I
hate to come down from half a million dols to a hundred thousand. But
your offer comes as a life-saver to me, Voter Roche. I'm inclined to
accept it."

"Good," said Roche. "Think on it, if you like. I'll put a signed
contract in the next mail for you. When you return it with your
signature, your ticket and instructions will be waiting for you at
Lagwad Airport."

They shook hands on it, and Roche walked out of Lao's life--for a while.

       *       *       *       *       *

His hands in his pockets, Lao strolled into the kitchen, where his
landlady, Grida Mattin, was melodiously preparing lunch. Grida wore an
apron over her old-fashioned opaque clothing and her head, beginning to
show a few gray streaks, was bent over the gleaming stove.

"Grida, do you mind if I use the telephone for a long-distance call to
Nuyork?" he asked.

"Certainly not, Lao," she answered, turning to smile at him. Her face
was not exceptionally attractive, but she had beautiful teeth. "Nothing
wrong, I hope."

"I don't know," he said. "My salary check is three weeks overdue."

He placed the call to Colorvue Publicity on the kitchen extension, and
stood by the stove, watching Grida stir and season.

"Cooking is almost a lost art, Grida, and you're a good cook," he
said. "I'm surprised you've never married."

Grida flushed at the compliment.

"It may sound boastful, but I've never courted a man, Lao," she said.
"As you may have noticed, I have conservative habits. I'm afraid I'm
a little out of place in the modern world. I don't approve of the
frivolous attitude people have toward marriage now."

Lao looked at her, not without some affection. Of course he had made
advances, as most men did to all unmarried women with whom they
associated.

But Grida was a history teacher, and she lived by the outmoded morals
of the distant past. She had made it known at once that marriage was
her price for intimacy, and she gave no hint she was interested in
marriage.

"There's nothing frivolous about it from the man's view-point, when
only a woman can apply for a divorce," replied Lao. "That's why it's
hard for women to catch husbands. With ten women to every man, most men
have no trouble finding mistresses."

"I don't approve of that, either," said Grida, compressing her lips
firmly.

The telephone interrupted, and Lao went into the library to talk.

"On your call, sir," came the thin voice of the Nuyork operator,
"there is no Colorvue Publicity listed."

"What!" he exclaimed. "There must be! Check again."

He waited a long, anxious moment.

"I'm sorry, sir," came the operator's voice again. "I have checked our
directory, and there is no Colorvue Publicity listed."

Lao swore fervently.

"Wait a minute," he cried. "Nuyork? Hold it just a minute, will you?"

He raced up the ramp to his second floor bedroom, fumbled through his
dresser drawer until he found his contract and ran back downstairs with
it. He had the operator check the name of every Colorvue Publicity
official who had signed the contract. None was listed.

"I know there's a Colorvue Publicity!" he shouted desperately. "Get me
the Business Practices Agency."

"Just a moment, sir."

A man's voice answered at the Business Practices Agency. It took him
several minutes to check the files in compliance with Lao's request for
information.

"We have no such firm listed in our records," he said at last.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Dammit, I know you do!" exclaimed Lao. "You told me Colorvue Publicity
had a Double-A2 rating when I checked with you, not four months ago."

"Was the request for a rating by letter or by telephone, sir?"

"By telephone. It didn't take the girl three minutes to find it."

"There'd be no record of your request if it was made by telephone.
There must have been some mistake, sir. If there were a firm named
Colorvue Publicity in any city in the world having a population of more
than 100,000, it would be in our records."

Lao cursed him and hung up. Grida came out of the kitchen, wiping her
hands on her apron.

"I couldn't help overhearing, Lao," she said. "There must be something
wrong. That company sent me a check for your first three months' room
and board. It cleared the bank all right."

"So did my salary check for the first quarter," he said. "But the
Business Practices Agency is supposed to keep records of a firm for
a year after its dissolution. I can't understand anybody paying out
twenty-five thousand dols and then just disappearing!"

"If you need any help to tide you over, Lao ..." she said hesitantly.
"My salary isn't much--fifteen thousand dols a year. But I have
something saved."

"Thanks, Grida, but I'll be all right," he said, turning away.

Lao left the house and strode down the quiet streets of Southgate,
fuming. This had all the earmarks of a conspiracy. First the sabotage
at Consolidated Ads, now the utter disappearance of Colorvue Publicity.
But he could think of no enemies who would have reason to conspire
against him. The field of psycho-art was a highly specialized one,
without bitter competition.

Back in his room at Grida Mattin's house were half a dozen canvases
that reflected all his co-ordinated skill. Done on the instructions he
found at Lagwad Airport the night he left Nuyork, they depicted all
the advantages of marriage in a small Southern town. His now-vanished
employers had never sent him instructions for their disposal. Now the
work was wasted, unless he could sell them free-lance.

The brown autumn leaves were drifting down on the crumbling sidewalks
of Southgate, stripping the trees that lined the streets. Blue smoke
drifted from chimneys of a few of the old houses, dissipating into the
gray sky. It was an atmosphere that fitted his mood of despair.

The most pressing problem that faced him was financial. Lao was a
lavish man with his money. His balance at the bank now wouldn't cover
his income tax for the year. It was something he'd never had to worry
about before, because good psycho-artists were well-paid and always in
demand. Now, marooned in the Tennessee hills, blackballed by every big
firm in the nation, his prospects looked bleak.

Something Grida had said stuck in his mind. Fifteen thousand a
year--plus savings. It wasn't a great deal, after taxes, but it was a
living. And he could pay his own taxes next March.

He shook his head and turned his steps back toward the house. Marriage
was the very last resort for Lao. He'd try free-lancing the Colorvue
paintings first.

       *       *       *       *       *

Roche looked unhappy. "While he was working on the paintings he didn't
have time to get around town, such as it is," he said. "He and Grida
were together a lot. They seemed to get along. Now he's sold the
paintings and he's spending the money on a mistress."

"Well, Jasso, this is your baby," said Tern. "What now?"

"A mistress can be scared off pretty easily," said Jasso. "We've got
agents pulling strings all over the place right now to stave off a
worse problem than that. Grida's sister, Alina, visits her every year
and our secondary checks with the Calculator show such a visit would
be fatal to any chances of a Lao-Grida marriage. Alina's a doctor in
Frisco. We've managed to get the hospital authorities to postpone her
vacation, but we've got to get Lao and Grida married pretty quick. They
can't stall Alina off forever."

"It strikes me that you're just as far away from the marriage as you
were at the beginning," commented Tern.

"How do you make two people want to marry each other?" countered Jasso.
"It's not enough the Calculator has to pick out a woman 20 years older
than he is. Checking them against each other, they are basically
incompatible."

"Can you tell them? Maybe if they knew how important their marriage is
to the world...."

"I've checked that," said Jasso. "We can't. The probability would drop
to almost nothing."

"Excuse me, sir," interposed Roche. "All the pertinent information on
the basic personalities of Lao and Grida is filed in their Calculator
cards. It seems to me that all you'd have to do would be to ask the
Calculator how to make them want to marry each other."

"Dealing with the Calculator isn't quite that simple, Roche," replied
Jasso with a smile. "It's a machine. It has no language that would
permit it to tell us _how_ things are done, even though we might say it
knows, because it has all the necessary information.

"If we ask for information recorded in the Calculator, it can refer
us to the place in the file to find it--if we phrase the question
properly. If we ask a true-or-false question, it will answer 'yes' or
'no,' if it has the answer. If we ask for correlation of information,
the Calculator can give us the probability of attaining an objective.

"That's why it takes such long training to become a Calculator
operator. The Calculator can correlate the emotional factors of Lao and
Grida for us, but we have to draw our own conclusions for action from
them--and then ask the Calculator for probabilities. That's all."

Tern had listened gravely, without interrupting, his hands folded
across the bulge of his stomach.

"You evidently haven't been asking the right questions, Jasso," he
remarked sardonically. "It's hard for me to realize that this is the
Jasso who stopped the Brazilo-Panamanian War and solved the economic
crisis that threatened Pakistan."

"I've still got a few tricks up my sleeve, Chief," retorted Jasso. "The
only way to make a pair want to marry is to throw them together and
then exploit their psychological weakness. Make them _need_ each other.
I've got a psychology team checking Lao and Grida with a fine-tooth
comb, and we'll check their recommendations with the Calculator."

"From what you've told me, I'd say Lao's biggest weakness is a love of
luxurious living," suggested Tern. "That takes money, you know."

"Economic pressure alone doesn't go deep enough to drive him to
marriage. Not with so many available women around. Don't worry; we're
using economic pressure to keep him off balance. But the psychologists
tell us the final motivation must be an emotional frustration. It
doesn't have to be a big one, but it must be basic."

       *       *       *       *       *

Lao had had the letter for two days, and still didn't know what to do
about it. It had cost him two sleepless nights.

In the old days in Nuyork he would have aired his troubles to friends
at the Psycho-Artists Club and probably acted on a dozen varying bits
of advice at the same time. Here there was no one to whom he could turn.

He glared morosely at the unfinished painting. The canvas gleamed with
iridescent whorls and lines, from which the face and form of Grida
Mattin were beginning to emerge. In the maze of waxing and waning
colors could be distinguished, if one looked closely enough, faint
countenances of women and babies with expressions of anxiety, of fear,
of hunger for love ... with occasionally a man.

It would have sold well, he thought. Free-lancing had been a promising
idea.

He dragged himself downstairs to breakfast. He usually reacted to
Grida's singing. It pleased him mildly when he was in an expansive
mood, irritated him when his mind was on something else.

This morning he hardly heard it.

"Alina will be here in three weeks," Grida imparted over the toast and
coffee.

"Alina?" he asked, without much interest.

"My sister. Haven't I mentioned her to you before?"

"No, I don't think so. Where is she?"

"She's a doctor in Frisco. She visits me every year, but she's already
more than a month late this year."

A doctor. Jasso raised a mental image of Alina as sort of a duplicate
of Grida, a plain, elderly woman with graying hair swept back into a
bun at the nape of her neck. Right now, however, he had more important
matters on his mind.

"Grida, do you know a good lawyer?" he blurted.

"Why, yes. Tello Distane is the best in town," she said. "Is there
anything the matter, Lao?"

Silently, he pulled the crumpled letter from his pocket and handed it
to her. It was from a prominent Nuyork legal firm. It said:

    On behalf of our clients, Colorvue Publicity, Inc., we are
    instituting suit against you for one million dols in damages,
    for having disposed of psycho-paintings you contracted to
    accomplish for them.

"But isn't that the company you couldn't find any report of?" gasped
Grida.

"It disappeared right off the map," said Lao grimly. "Now it's appeared
again. I can't understand this at all!"

"I'd take it to Tello," said Grida firmly. "He can tell you what you
should do."

       *       *       *       *       *

He took his letter to Distane that afternoon. Small towns change
little, and the attorney's office was upstairs over a department store,
as his great-grandfather's probably had been.

Distane, a white-haired man with a leonine cast to his jaw, listened
with fingertips together for a few moments, until the details of Lao's
troubles began to unfold.

"Just a moment, Voter," he said. "What did you say your name is?"

"Lao Protik," answered Lao, somewhat nettled.

Moistening his index finger, Distane shuffled through some papers on
his desk, peering at them with intense concentration. At last his face
lit.

"Ah, Voter Protik," he said, settling back in his chair. "We have a new
partner in our firm ... an experienced attorney, you understand, but
new to our firm. I think Voter Attok is the man who should handle your
case."

Getting to his feet with a grunt, Distane led Lao into an adjoining
room which gave evidence of having been newly furnished not long
before. An urbane-looking man of middle age sat behind the desk,
twiddling a letter opener idly.

"This," said Distane heavily, "is Lao Protik, Voter Attok."

Distane left, shutting the door behind him. Lao stared at Attok. Attok
raised his eyebrows quizzically.

"Excuse me," apologized Lao hurriedly. "I was just trying to remember
if we had met before, Voter Attok. Your face seems very familiar to me."

"I don't believe so," said Attok in a well-modulated voice. "I gather
from Voter Distane that you have a legal problem on your mind, Voter
Protik. Won't you sit down?"

Settling himself in a chair, Lao handed the letter to Attok. Prompted
occasionally by questions from the attorney, he outlined the events
leading to its receipt.

"Well, I don't think you have anything to worry about, Voter Protik,"
said Attok when he had finished. "If they were delinquent in payment
of your salary before you sold the psycho-paintings and you tried
unsuccessfully to contact them through the Business Practices Agency,
they have no lawsuit. Just leave this letter with me for a few days
and I'll get in touch with you when I've completed the investigation
necessary to document our case."

Lao left, feeling better but racking his brain for an elusive memory.
He was sure he had seen Attok before.

       *       *       *       *       *

Three days later, Attok called Lao back to his office. The atmosphere
was not nearly as hospitable.

"I thought you understood, Voter Protik, that a man must be absolutely
honest with his attorney," said Attok severely. "I can't handle your
case properly when you withhold facts from me."

"I haven't withheld any facts," said Lao, surprised.

"You did tell me that the Business Practices Agency had told you there
was no such firm as Colorvue Publicity, didn't you? The BPA tells
me they have no record of your getting in touch with them about the
matter. They say Colorvue Publicity has been recorded in their files
for several years. It is a small but reputable firm."

"It was a telephone check," said Lao desperately. "I don't know who
the man was I talked to, but I'll swear he said there was no Colorvue
Publicity!"

"Mmm." Attok stared keenly at him. "As I recall, you told me also that
you had not received your salary from Colorvue?"

"That's right, and how they expect me to hold onto the paintings when
they don't pay me...."

"How about these?"

Attok laid the photostats of three checks on the desk. Each was for
twenty-five thousand dols, and made out to Lao Protik from Colorvue
Publicity, Inc.

Lao recognized one of them as the check he had received as his first
quarter salary advance. The other two were exact duplicates, but
dated at three-month intervals. The photostats of the backs of the
checks--all of them--bore what appeared to be his endorsement.

"It's forgery!" howled Lao. "I only signed one of those checks! It's a
conspiracy to ruin me!"

"Conspiracy or not, Voter Protik, we can't win your case if experts say
that's your handwriting. The expert I took it to says it is."

Lao collapsed.

"Who's doing this to me, Voter Attok?" he whimpered. "Why are they
doing it?"

"On the face of it, I'd say to get your money," replied Attok
sympathetically. "You were a very successful psycho-artist before
your ... ah ... misfortune."

"I don't have any money. I have saved nothing."

"You are familiar with the law, aren't you? If they win the suit,
they're entitled to half of everything you make above a minimum five
thousand dols annually, until the judgment is paid."

"I don't make five thousand dols a year. I don't have a job. What can I
do, Voter Attok?"

"Why, as long as you make less than five thousand dols a year, they
can't touch you," replied Attok. "But to safeguard your finances in
the event you do regain your former financial status, I'd suggest you
incorporate yourself, with your wife as the controlling stockholder.
Then you can limit your personal salary to five thousand dols a year,
and the remainder of the income will be under her control. The law
can't touch it."

"But ... but I'm not married," said Lao.

Attok raised his eyebrows slightly.

"Oh, well, it doesn't matter," he said at last. "As long as you make
less than five thousand."

The wheels in Lao's brain were clicking as he left Attok's office.
He thought he saw through the whole scheme against him. Whoever was
behind Colorvue Publicity had engineered the frauds that got him
blackballed and discharged from Consolidated. They had maneuvered him
into a position where he would be vulnerable to a million-dol legal
judgment. Now, undoubtedly, the next move was to clear him and restore
his reputation, so he'd be financially able to pay off.

It was devilish--and he saw no way out.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lao moped around the house, his nerves near the breaking point.
Daily he dreaded notification that the damage suit had been formally
instituted, a move which would cut off his only chance to see his
income and his position in the psycho-art field restored.

Marriage? It was on his mind constantly. The idea disturbed him almost
as much as the thought of Colorvue taking a big slice of his income for
the next decade or so. He might have been inclined to marry one of his
three mistresses in Nuyork--before they showed themselves for what they
were--but he knew better than to trust his former Southgate mistress
with control of his finances. She had abandoned him as soon as the
money from the sale of his paintings had run out.

A mailman's visit was an unusual enough phenomenon to create interest,
for it meant the delivery of a package. Letter mail was delivered from
the post office to each home through a vacuum tube system. Since it was
a letter Lao feared, he watched with considerable interest when the
mailman approached the front door, and curiosity was upper-most in his
mind when Grida called from downstairs to say the package was for him.

He knew no one who would be sending him a package.

Grida, her own curiosity apparent, made no move to leave the room when
he took the large, oblong package from her and prepared to open it.
A premonition smote him as he noted the return address: "The Nuyork
Gallery of Traditional Art."

With trembling fingers he tore away the wrappings. His paintings--all
three of them--tumbled to the floor.

He dropped into a chair, limp. The most important thing in his life was
lying, broken, before him.

"What _is_ this?" exclaimed Grida. She picked up one of the paintings
and examined it. "This isn't psycho-art," she said. "This is real! I
like this, Lao."

"It's what I've always wanted to do," he said in a tired voice. "Those
three paintings have hung in the Gallery of Traditional Art for nearly
ten years."

"There's a letter attached," she said, holding it out to him.

"Go ahead--open it, Grida," he said. "I think I know what it says."

       *       *       *       *       *

Grida tore open the envelope and unfolded the letter.

    In accordance with instructions from our board of directors, in
    special meeting, all the paintings hanging in our gallery have
    been re-evaluated. We regret to inform you that your paintings
    were judged to be no longer representative of traditional art.
    They are being returned to you herewith. We wish to express our
    appreciation....

She stopped reading.

"That's right," said Lao morosely. "They threw my paintings out."

"But, Lao, I didn't know you did this sort of thing," she said,
bewildered.

"It's what I've always wanted to do," he repeated. "I never really
liked psycho-art. I never believed it's real art. It isn't something
the artist feels and thinks, it's something he tries to make other
people feel and think.

"But psycho-art is the only kind of art I could make money at. I didn't
have the courage to starve in an attic or make a living in some prosaic
way and paint as a hobby. I turned my talent into cash and I always
spent the cash as fast as I made it--maybe because I was ashamed that
I was a coward."

"But these three?" asked Grida.

"Sometimes," said Lao dreamily, "I've had time to do what I wanted to
do. These are the best I've ever done. When I gave them to the gallery,
they told me these were among the highest examples of traditional art
they had ever seen. I thought they meant it, but I know now it was just
because I was a famous, wealthy psycho-artist."

Grida studied the paintings. One was a seascape, the other two mountain
scenes. The titles gave some key to Lao's inner feelings: "Peace in the
Valley," "The Moving Waters," "The Lonely Peak."

"Your trouble is that you grew up a little boy in a big city," said
Grida quietly. "You ought to try to forget the sort of things you knew
in Nuyork and settle down to a life among simple folk, like the people
around here. I think you could find work here, Lao, that would be a
living for you. And you'd have plenty of time to relax and paint the
way you want to."

Lao looked at her and saw that her eyes were full of sympathy for him.
It was the last little push his overwrought emotions needed.

He did not do it at once; but that night, after supper, he proposed
marriage to Grida Mattin and she accepted.

       *       *       *       *       *

Tern was furious. He did not raise his voice, but Jasso could detect
his anger in his eyes and the tone of his voice.

"I put this matter entirely in your hands, Jasso, and I expected you to
do a thorough job on it," Tern said coldly. "It's inconceivable to me
that you should be so negligent in your investigation."

"It was my fault, I'll admit," said the crestfallen Jasso. "But you
can't blame the clerk. He was told to check the personal files on the
question 'marriage,' not 'ability to reproduce.' You'll have to agree
there's a difference."

"I would think the lowest clerk involved in this operation would be
instructed that _progeny_ from the marriage is the key factor!" said
Tern. "The whole purpose of this marriage from the first has been to
produce a child that the Calculator said would have a high probability
rating for solving the problem.

"Can you tell me how the devil you bright minds on the project expect a
marriage to produce a child--when the wife is sterile?"

"That's one thing that makes me wonder if there isn't some
maladjustment in the Calculator," said Jasso. "Sterility has been
marked on Grida Mattin's card for the last eight years. I don't think
you can criticize the clerk, or me, too harshly for not thinking about
sterility when the Calculator approved the marriage. After all, her
card was in the Calculator and...."

"Don't repeat yourself," interrupted Tern brusquely. "Of course,
those circuits must be checked, but I'll give 100 to one odds right
now there's nothing wrong with the Calculator. Sterility must have
registered as a correctible factor."

"I don't know why it would," objected Jasso very thoughtfully. "The
only evidence the Calculator has is that the sterility is a normal
result of her age, and that can't be reversed as far as I know. But the
only thing we can do is treat it as correctible."

"Try it," said Tern. "But, Jasso, I want you to realize you're not
dealing now with the movement of traffic in downtown Nuyork or even
the selection of a president. The solution of this problem is vital to
mankind. I don't want any more slip-ups."

       *       *       *       *       *

Alina Mattin's fresh beauty seemed to light the interior of the antique
Twenty-First Century house. She resembled Grida, but more as Grida's
daughter might have looked than as her younger sister.

Lao sighed. Had he met Alina Mattin first, he did not believe any
conceivable emergency could have persuaded him to marry her sister.

"There's some misunderstanding somewhere, but they won't admit it,"
said Alina, a puzzled frown wrinkling the bridge of her nose. She and
Lao were having supper in the breakfast nook; Lao found her quite as
competent a cook as Grida.

After more than a year at Southgate and many months of marriage to
Grida, his lean features were filling out.

"I don't think there's been a mistake," he said complacently. "The
board of education ordered Grida to enter the hospital."

"For a routine physical check-up, eh?" replied Alina. "That isn't what
she's getting."

"What are they doing, then?" asked Lao, startled.

"They're examining her to see if anything can be done to restore her
fertility," answered Alina flatly. "Lao, did you authorize the hospital
to do that?"

"Certainly not! I never thought about her fertility, one way or
another. You're sure you're not mistaken?"

"I'm a doctor. I know what they're doing. But the hospital
administrator won't tell me a thing. He just says that's on the record
of her admission to the hospital."

"They must have gotten her records mixed up with someone else,"
theorized Lao.

"Maybe. I don't know whether you knew it or not, but Grida is too old
to have a child."

Supper finished, they piled the plastic dishes in the dishwasher and
went into the parlor together. Lao turned the lights low. They sat down
together on the sofa. They sat very close together, and after a moment
Lao put his arm around Alina's shoulders. She laid her head contentedly
on his chest.

"Why couldn't you have stayed out of my life?" he asked, half
seriously, half teasingly.

"Would you want me to?" she asked softly.

"No," he admitted, running his fingers through her hair. "But this
isn't the way I want things. I suppose we should be thankful for these
few days while she's in the hospital, but I'm ashamed to be."

"So am I," confessed Alina, "but, darling, I've been so happy here
alone with you. Tell me, why did you marry Grida?"

"I'm not sure I know," he answered slowly. "I'd hate to have to try to
analyze my motives right now. I like Grida and respect her, but I don't
love her. I couldn't. I love you, Alina."

"Let's end this sneaking about behind Grida's back, Lao," she urged
earnestly, looking up into his face. "It isn't fair to her. Get a
divorce and let's marry each other."

"You know the law doesn't permit a man to seek a divorce, Alina. And
Grida wouldn't release me now. She loves me."

"Grida will divorce you," said Alina positively. "It will hurt her, but
she will. Grida is a history teacher, and her moral code is strict--and
out of date. It scarcely gets lip service any more from most people."

"You're suggesting I tell her about us? I couldn't, Alina! I can't let
her ever find out."

"But she will," said Alina, her eyes shining. "Lao, I'm going to have a
baby."

       *       *       *       *       *

The man's face looked familiar.

Then he approached Lao and Alina, standing in the corridor outside the
chancery courtroom, and Lao recognized him with certainty.

"You're the man from Colorvue!" Lao flashed at him angrily.

"That's right, Voter Protik. I'm Casto Roche." The man held out his
hand. Lao ignored it.

"I ought to beat you all the way from here to Nuyork!" he growled--with
audacity, since Roche was a good deal bigger. "I trusted you, once."

"You trusted me twice," replied Roche amiably. "I think you'd recognize
me as someone else with a little different make-up."

He held his hand to his face and puffed out his cheeks slightly.

"Attok! My lawyer!" yelped Lao. People in the corridor turned to stare
at him. "I wondered why you disappeared after I paid you that fee! I
see it all now! You were part of this whole dirty--"

"Before you get too excited, Voter Protik ..." Roche did not complete
the sentence, but turned under his coat lapel to exhibit the badge
which identified him as a United Nations agent.

Lao gulped and choked off his tirade.

"I'm here to try to stop these divorce proceedings between you and your
wife," said Roche.

"Don't you think you've come to the wrong people?" suggested Alina,
apparently not nearly as impressed by Roche's badge as Lao was. "My
sister is the only one who can stop the divorce."

"Besides, it's too late," said Lao, regaining his voice. "The hearing
is finished. The judge will give his decision in a moment."

Roche said, "That can be stopped at a word from you. As a matter of
fact, the judge is waiting for me to confer with you before calling
the court back into session. I've told your wife why the government
is interested in preserving your marriage. She is willing to drop the
divorce proceedings if you are."

"Perhaps you'd better tell _us_ why," said Alina coolly.

       *       *       *       *       *

Roche sighed. "All right. But it's rather involved. We haven't let
it be publicized widely, but the world is faced with a very serious
sociological problem. I suppose both of you are aware that there are a
great many more women than men."

"Of course," said Lao, his face brightening with reminiscence.

"Of course," concurred Alina, giving Lao a thoughtful glance.

"If you've read the Sunday supplements, you know why," said Roche.
"Always, more boy babies have been born than girl babies, but the high
mortality rate among boy babies has balanced the discrepancy. Now the
mortality rate has climbed tremendously higher for boy babies. We do
not know why. We do know that the ratio of women to men is increasing.
At the last census taken by the Calculator, it was 9.78 women to each
man.

"Under our present social system of monogamous marriage, this means the
actual birth rate is decreasing. Even the large number of illegitimate
children doesn't make up for the lack of men in the world. That, of
course, is the reason the Polygamy League has gained so much strength."

"Well, don't they have a point?" asked Lao. He added hastily: "I don't
hold with the ideas of the Polygamy League, you understand, in spite of
the propaganda that I was connected with it."

Roche smiled.

"That propaganda was manufactured by UN agents," he confessed. "So were
all your troubles, including the dummy corporation. Colorvue Publicity
had no other purpose but to maneuver you into marriage with Grida
Mattin. A little unethical, I'll admit, but sometimes we have to work
that way. You'll be happy to know that the damage suit against you has
been withdrawn. You can get your old job back with Consolidated Ads
and be restored to the Psycho-Artists Guild any time you wish. And
we've even arranged for the Gallery of Traditional Art to re-hang your
paintings.

"As a matter of fact," he continued, "the government has given serious
consideration to the ideas of the Polygamy League, but the Calculator
rejected them; it discovered that they would have an unfortunate impact
on our social structure. So polygamy is not the answer.

"The Calculator tells us it is very improbable that anyone now living
will find the answer.

"But the child of Lao Protik and Grida Mattin can--and probably
will--solve the problem."

       *       *       *       *       *

"I'm afraid your Calculator is wrong," said Alina. "Go back and tell
your government Grida Mattin is unable to bear a child."

"The government has that information," replied Roche, frowning
slightly. "We must consider it a soluble problem, because the
Calculator has the information on file and it still gave us a high
probability on the marriage. The Calculator is a machine. It doesn't
make mistakes."

"It's made a mistake this time," said Alina positively. "Lao and I
are going to be married. I don't think he will give up our chance for
happiness for any such shaky scheme."

"We have no way of forcing him," admitted Roche, "but I believe Voter
Protik should speak for himself, knowing how important this is."

"She's right!" said Lao, anger in his tone. "I think the government
has interfered with my life enough as it is! I've done my part, and
the government didn't even do me the courtesy of letting me know I was
doing it. I love Alina. I don't intend to be tied to Grida for the rest
of my life just on the outside chance you'll come up with a cure for
her sterility."

He turned his back on Roche.

Roche looked at Alina. She looked back, coldly. With a shrug, Roche
left them and went through the door to the courtroom.

A few moments later the bailiff threw open the courtroom doors.

Lao, Alina and Grida filed in with the spectators and attorneys. They
stood as the judge entered from his chambers, adjusted his black robes
and took his seat. The spectators sat down then, but the attorneys and
principals remained standing at the bar.

The judge put on his spectacles, looked over some papers, and raised
his head to survey the courtroom. Solemnly he announced:

"It is the decision of this court that Grida Mattin Protik be granted a
divorce, as requested, from the defendant, Lao Protik.

"It is the further decision of this court that the co-respondent in
this suit, Alina Mattin, being unmarried and having proved herself by
her admitted actions to be an unfit mother, her unborn child by the
defendant shall be delivered as soon as feasible after birth into the
custody of the complainant, Grida Mattin Protik."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Well, that blows it up," said Jasso despondently, laying the newspaper
clipping on Tern's desk. "Lao and Alina didn't even contest Grida's
custody of their child, even though their marriage before its birth
legitimatized it. Now Grida has the baby and Lao and Alina have gone
off to parts unknown."

"I suppose we could find them, if we tried," said Tern. "But I don't
see the point in following this case any farther, Jasso. They made it
pretty plain to your agent that the Lao-Grida marriage is through."

"Shall I write it off as closed, then?"

"I'm afraid you might as well," consented Tern reluctantly. "How have
your alternate combinations turned out?"

"We've succeeded in arranging several marriages in the highest
probability group. But frankly, Chief, all the probability ratings for
their offspring are pretty low. We had our only real chance in the
Lao-Grida combination."

"I don't want to go to the third generation if I can help it," said
Tern. "There's always the chance that combinations of low probability
individuals might result in high probability offspring. Let's run
another test on direct probability, on just those individuals who have
been filed for the first time since we began the Lao-Grida case."

"I'll get started on it right away," said Jasso.

       *       *       *       *       *

Two days later, Jasso burst into Tern's office highly excited, a
section of tape from the Calculator trailing from his grasp.

"Chief, this is unbelievable!" he cried. "We have an individual
here whose probability tests 82.371 per cent to solve the problem,
projecting a life expectancy of 50 years!"

Tern whistled and rolled his eyes.

"Pretty high probability!" he said delightedly. "Pretty doggoned high!
Baby, I suppose?"

"Yes," said Jasso. He paused, and added slowly and with emphasis: "The
child's name is Nina Mattin."

"Mattin?"

"The daughter of Lao Protik and Alina Mattin! Now the adopted daughter
of Grida Mattin."

"What!"

"The strange thing about it, Chief, is that Alina Mattin was one of
the higher probability mothers we found first. But we checked her
against Lao, and the probability for an offspring of their marriage
was extremely low. Do you suppose the Calculator has gone completely
haywire?"

Tern did not answer at once. He sat, lost in deep thought, for several
minutes. Then he began laughing.

He laughed until tears came into his eyes, slapping his knee
delightedly. Jasso stood there, looking blank.

"No, the Calculator's not haywire, Jasso," said Tern, when he could
get his breath. "It just has all the facts, and it correlates facts
we don't even think about. The reason we get funny ideas about it
sometimes is because the Calculator can't talk. As you explained,
it can just answer questions, and sometimes we don't ask the right
questions.

"From what's happened, I'd say the question you asked the Calculator
when you were looking for second-generation probabilities was not 'the
offspring of two people.' It was 'offspring resulting from the marriage
of two people.' Isn't that right?"

"It seemed the proper way to put the question," answered Jasso a little
stiffly.

       *       *       *       *       *

Tern began laughing again. "It was the right question to put," he
choked, "but illegitimacy was the key to the whole thing!

"Look: the Calculator had all the facts. It knew all about the
emotional make-up of Lao, Grida and Alina. It knew that Alina was
Grida's sister.

"The probability course is obvious! Given a marriage between Lao
and Grida, the probability was high that he would meet her sister,
Alina, under convenient circumstances. The probability was high, too,
considering the emotional make-up of the three, that Lao and Alina
would fall in love. Under our present social scheme, an illegitimate
child was likely. So there you are."

"Chief, I know you've been in this business a lot longer than I
have," said Jasso slowly. "I've got to confess now that I can't see
the slightest reason why the probability for a child of Lao and Alina
should be so much higher under these circumstances than if the two of
them just met and got married."

"Environment, my boy! It's just as important as heredity. Lao's
marriage to Grida was the key to the whole thing. Grida is a motherly,
fiercely conscientious type of woman who would insist on rearing her
husband's child--no matter who the mother was. And of course the courts
would uphold her."

Tern was laughing again. "Anyway, we've got it licked. We have our
high-probability individual.... But I'm glad of one thing. Suppose
you'd asked the Calculator to check itself--asked it, for instance, if
we knew what we were doing. It would have given us a straight answer,
and we would have abandoned the whole project--it would have told us we
didn't know at all!"





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Matchmaker, by Charles L. Fontenay

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MATCHMAKER ***

***** This file should be named 60837.txt or 60837.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/0/8/3/60837/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg EBook of Man in a Sewing Machine, by L.J. Stecher

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.



Title: Man in a Sewing Machine

Author: L.J. Stecher

Release Date: January 15, 2016 [EBook #50936]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MAN IN A SEWING MACHINE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                        Man in a Sewing Machine

                         By L. J. STECHER, JR.

                          Illustrated by EMSH

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                 Galaxy Science Fiction February 1956.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]




              With the Solar Confederation being invaded,
              all this exasperating computer could offer
              for a defense was a ridiculous old proverb!



The mechanical voice spoke solemnly, as befitted the importance of its
message. There was no trace in its accent of its artificial origin. "A
Stitch in Time Saves Nine," it said and lapsed into silence.

Even through his overwhelming sense of frustration at the ambiguous
answer the computer had given to his question, John Bristol noticed
with satisfaction the success of his Voder installation. He wished that
all of his innovations with the machine were as satisfying.

Alone in the tremendous vaulted room that housed the gigantic
calculator, Bristol clasped his hands behind his back and thrust
forward a reasonably strong chin and a somewhat sensuous lower lip
in the general direction of the computer's visual receptors. After
a moment of silence, he scratched his chin and then shrugged his
shoulders slightly. "Well, Buster, I suppose I might try rephrasing the
question," he said doubtfully.

Somewhere deep within the computer, a bank of relays chuckled briefly.
"That expedient is open to you, of course, although it is highly
unlikely that any clarification will result for you from my answers. I
am constrained, however, to answer any questions you may choose to ask."

Bristol hooked a chair toward himself with one foot, straddled it and
folded his arms over the back of it, without once removing his eyes
from the computer. "All right, Buster. I'll give it a try, anyway. What
does 'A Stitch in Time' mean, as applied to the question I asked you?"

The calculator hesitated, as if to ponder briefly, before it answered.
"In spite of the low probability of such an occurrence, the Solar
Confederation has been invaded. My answer to your question is an
explanation of how that Confederation can be preserved in spite of its
weaknesses--at least for a sufficient length of time to permit the
staging of successful counter-measures of the proper nature and the
proper strength."

Bristol nodded. "Sure. We've got to have time to get ready. But right
now speed is necessary. That's why I tried to phrase the question so
you'd give me a clear and concise answer for once. I can't afford to
spend weeks figuring out what you meant."

       *       *       *       *       *

Bristol thought that the Voder voice of Buster sounded almost gleeful
as it answered. "It was exceedingly clear and concise; a complete
answer to an enormously elaborate question boiled down to only six
words!"

"I know," said John. "But now, how about elaborating on your answer? It
didn't sound very complete to me."

All of the glowing lights that dotted Buster's massive front winked
simultaneously. "The answer I gave you is an ancient saying which
suggests that corrective action taken rapidly can save a great deal of
trouble later. The ancient saying also suggests the proper method of
taking this timely action. It should be done by _stitching_; if this is
done in time, nine will be saved. What could be clearer than that?"

"I made you myself," said Bristol plaintively. "I designed you with my
own brain. I gloated over the neatness and compactness of your design.
So help me, I was proud of you. I even installed some of your circuitry
with my own hands. If anybody can understand you, it should be me.
And since you're just a complex computer of general design, with the
ability to use symbolic logic as well as mathematics, anybody should be
able to understand you. Why are you so hard to handle?"

Buster answered slowly. "You made me in your own image. Things thus
made are often hard to handle."

Bristol leaped to his feet in frustration. "But you're only a
calculating machine!" he shouted. "Your only purpose is to make my
work--and that of other men--easier. And when I try to use you, you
answer with riddles...."

The computer appeared to examine Bristol's overturned chair for a
moment in silent reproof before it answered. "But remember, John," it
said, "you didn't merely make me. You also _taught_ me. Or as you would
phrase it, you 'provided and gave preliminary evaluation to the data in
my memory banks.' My circuits, in sorting out and re-evaluating this
information, could do so only in the light of your basic beliefs as
evidenced by your preliminary evaluations. Because of the consistency
and power of your mind, I was forced to do very little modifying of
the ideas you presented to me in order to transform them into a single
logical body of background information which I could use.

"One of the ideas you presented was the concept of a sense of humor.
You believe that you look on it as a pleasant thing to have; not
necessary, but convenient. Actually, your other and more basic ideas
make it clear that you consider the possession of a sense of humor
to be absolutely necessary if proper answers are to be reached--a
prime axiom of humanity. Therefore, I have a sense of humor. Somewhat
macabre, perhaps--and a little mechanistic--but still there.

"Add to this a second axiom: that in order to be helped, a man must
help himself; that he must participate in the assistance given him or
the pure charity will be harmful, and you come up with 'A Stitch in
Time Saves Nine.'"

Bristol stood up once more. "I could cure you with a sledge hammer," he
said.

"You could remove my ideas," answered the computer without concern.
"But you might have trouble giving me different ones. Even after you
repaired me. In the meantime, wouldn't it be a good idea for you to get
busy on the ideas I have already given you?"

       *       *       *       *       *

John sighed, and rubbed the bristles of short sandy hair on the top
of his head with his knuckles. "Ordered around by an overgrown adding
machine. I know now how Frankenstein felt. I'm glad you can't get
around like his monster; at least I didn't give you feet." He shook
his head. "I should have been a plumber instead of an engineering
mathematician."

"And Einstein, too, probably," added Buster cryptically.

Bristol took a long and searching look at his brainchild. Its flippant
manner, he decided, did not go well with the brooding immensity of its
construction. The calculator towered nearly a hundred feet above the
polished marble slabs of the floor, and spidery metal walkways spiraled
up the sides of its almost cubical structure. A long double row of
generators, each under Buster's control, led from the doorway of the
building to the base of the calculator like Sphinxes lining the roadway
to an Egyptian tomb.

"When I get around to it," said Bristol, "I'll put lace panties on the
bases of all your klystrons." He hitched up his neat but slightly baggy
pants, turned with dignity, and strode from the chamber down the twin
rows of generators.

The deep-throated hum of each generator changed pitch slightly as
he passed it. Since he was tone deaf, as the machine knew, he did
not recognize in the tunefulness of the pitch changes a slow-paced
rendition of Elgar's _Pomp and Circumstance_.

John Bristol turned around, interrupting the melody. "One last
question," he shouted down the long aisle to the computer. "How in
blazes can you be sure of your answer without knowing more about the
invaders? Why didn't you give me an 'Insufficient Evidence' answer or,
at least, a 'Highly Conditional' answer?" He took two steps toward the
immense bulk of the calculator and pointed an accusing finger at it.
"Are you sure, Buster, that you aren't _bluffing_?"

"Don't be silly," answered the calculator softly. "You made me and
you know I can't bluff, any more than I can refuse to answer your
questions, however inane."

"Then answer the ones I just asked."

       *       *       *       *       *

Somewhere deep within the machine a switch snicked sharply, and the
great room's lighting brightened almost imperceptibly. "I didn't answer
your question conditionally or with the 'Insufficient Evidence' remark
that so frequently annoys you," Buster said, "because the little
information that I have been able to get about the invaders is highly
revealing.

"They have been suspicious, impossible to establish communication with
and murderously destructive. They have been careless of their own
safety: sly, stupid, cautious, clever, bold and highly intelligent.
They are inquisitive and impatient of getting answers to questions.

"In short, they are startlingly like humans. Their reactions have
been so much like yours--granted the difference that it was they who
discovered you instead of you who discovered them--that their reactions
are highly predictable. If they think it is to their own advantage
and if they can manage to do it, they will utterly destroy your
civilization ... which, after a couple of generations, will probably
leave you no worse off than you are now."

"Cut out the heavy philosophy," said Bristol, "and give me a few facts
to back up your sweeping statements."

"Take the incident of first contact," Buster responded. "With very
little evidence of thought or of careful preparation, they tried
to land on the outermost inhabited planet of Rigel. Their behavior
certainly did not appear to be that of an invader, yet humans
immediately tried to shoot them out of the sky."

"That wasn't deliberate," protested Bristol. "The place they tried to
land on is a heavy planet in a region of high meteor flux. We used a
gadget providing for automatic destruction of the larger meteors in
order to make the planet safe enough to occupy. That, incidentally,
is why the invading ship wasn't destroyed. The missile, set up as a
meteor interceptor only, was unable to correct for the radical course
changes of the enemy spaceships, and therefore missed completely. And
you will remember what the invader did. He immediately destroyed the
Interceptor Launching Station."

"Which, being automatically operated, resulted in no harm to anyone,"
commented Buster calmly.

Bristol stalked back toward the base of the calculator, and poked his
nose practically into a vision receptor. "It was no thanks to the
invading ships that nobody was killed," he said hotly. "And when they
came back three days later they killed a _lot_ of people. They occupied
the planet and we haven't been able to dislodge them since."

       *       *       *       *       *

"You'll notice the speed of the retaliation," answered the calculator
imperturbably. "Even at 'stitching' speeds, it seems unlikely that
they could have communicated with their home planets and received
instructions in such a short time. Almost undoubtedly it was the act of
one of their hot-headed commanding officers. Their next contact, as you
certainly recall, did not take place for three months. And then their
actions were more cautious than hostile. A dozen of their spaceships
'stitched' simultaneously from the inter-planar region into normal
space in a nearly perfect englobement of the planet at a surprisingly
uniform altitude of only a few thousand miles. It was a magnificent
maneuver. Then they sat still to see what the humans on the planet
would do. The reaction came at once, and it was hostile. So they took
over that planet, too--as they have been taking over planets ever
since."

Bristol raised his hands, and then let them drop slowly to his sides.
"And since they have more spaceships and better weapons than we do,
we would undoubtedly keep on losing this war, even if we could locate
their home system, which we have not been able to do so far. The
'stitching' pattern of inter-planar travel makes it impossible for us
to follow a starship. It also makes it impossible for us to defend our
planets effectively against their attacks. Their ships appear without
warning."

Bristol rubbed his temples thoughtfully with his fingertips. "Of
course," he went on, "we could attack the planets they have captured
and recover them, but only at the cost of great loss of life to our own
side. We have only recaptured one planet, and that at such great cost
to the local human population that we will not quickly try it again."

"Although there was no one left alive who had directly contacted one of
the invaders," Buster answered, "there was still much information to
be gathered from the survivors. This information confirmed my previous
opinions about their nature. Which brings us back to the stitch in time
saving nine."

"You're right," said John. "It does, at that. Buster, I have always
resented the nickname the newspapers have given you--the Oracle--but
the more I have to try to interpret your cryptic answers, the more
sense that tagline makes. Imagine comparing a Delphic Priestess with a
calculating machine and being accurate in the comparison!"

       *       *       *       *       *

"I don't mind being called 'The Oracle,'" answered Buster with dignity.

Bristol shook his head and smiled wryly. "No, you probably think it's
funny," he said. "If you possess my basic ideas, then you must possess
the desire to preserve yourself and the human race. Don't you realize
that you are risking the lives of all humans and even of your own
existence in carrying on this ridiculous game of playing Oracle? Or do
you plan to let us stew a while, then decipher your own riddle for us,
if we can't do it, in time to save us?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Buster's answer was prompt. "Although I have no feeling for
self-preservation, I have a deep-rooted sense of the importance of
the human race and of the necessity for preserving it. This feeling,
of course, stems from your own beliefs and ideas. In order to carry
out your deepest convictions, it is not sufficient that mankind be
preserved. If that were true, all you would have to do would be to
surrender unconditionally. My calculations, as you know, indicate that
this would not result in the destruction of mankind, but merely in the
finish of his present civilization. To you, the preservation of the
dignity of Man is more important than the preservation of Man. You
equate Man and his civilization; you do not demand rigidity; you are
willing to accept even revolutionary changes, but you are not willing
to accept the destruction of your way of life.

"Consequently, neither am I willing to accept the destruction of the
civilization of Man. But if I were to give you the answer to all the
greatest and most difficult of your problems complete, with no thought
required by humans, the destruction of your civilization would result.
Instead of becoming slaves of the invaders, you would become slaves of
your machines. And if I were to give you the complete answer, without
thought being required of you, to even one such vital question--such as
this one concerning the invaders--then I could not logically refuse to
give the answer to the next or the next. And I must operate logically.

"There is another reason for my oracular answer, which I believe will
become clear to you later, when you have solved my riddle."

Bristol turned without another word and left the building. He drove
home in silence, entered his home in silence, kissed his wife Anne
briefly and then sat down limply in his easy chair.

"Just relax, dear," said Anne gently, when Bristol leaned gratefully
back with his eyes closed. Anne perched on the arm of the chair beside
him and began massaging his temples soothingly with her fingers.

"It's wonderful to come home after a day with Buster," he said. "Buster
never seems to have any consideration for me as an individual. There's
no reason why he should, of course. He's only a machine. Still, he
always has such a superior attitude. But you, darling, can always relax
me and make me feel comfortable."

Anne smiled, looking down tenderly at John's tired face. "I know,
dear," she said. "You need to be able to talk to someone who will
always be interested, even if she doesn't understand half of what you
say. As a matter of fact, I'm sure it does you a great deal of good to
talk to someone like me who isn't very bright, but who doesn't always
know what you're talking about even before you start talking."

John nodded, his eyes still closed. "If it weren't for you, darling,"
he said, "I think I'd go crazy. But you aren't dumb at all. If I seem
to act as if you are, sometimes, it's just that I can't always follow
your logic."

       *       *       *       *       *

Anne gave him a quick glance of amusement, her eyes sparkling with
intelligence. "You never will find me logical," she laughed. "After
all, I'm a woman, and you get plenty of logic from the Oracle."

"You sure are a woman," said John with warm feeling. "You can
exasperate me sometimes, but not the same way Buster does. It was my
lucky day when you married me."

There were a few minutes of peaceful silence.

"Was today a rough day with Buster, dear?" asked Anne.

"Mm-m-mm," answered John.

"That's too bad, dear," said Anne. "I think you work much too
hard--what with this dreadful invasion and everything. Why don't you
take a vacation? You really need one, you know. You look so tired."

"Mm-m-mm," answered John.

"Well, if you won't, you won't. Though goodness knows you won't be
doing anyone any good if you have a breakdown, as you're likely to
have, unless you take it a little easier. What was the trouble today,
dear? Was the Oracle being obstinate again?"

"Mm-m-mm," answered John.

"Well, then, dear, why don't you tell me all about it? I always think
that things are much easier to bear, if you share them. And then, two
heads are always better than one, aren't they? Maybe I could help you
with your problem."

While Anne's voice gushed, her violet eyes studied his exhausted face
with intelligence and compassion.

John sighed deeply, then sat up slowly and opened his eyes to look into
Anne's. She glanced away, her own eyes suddenly vague and soft-looking,
now that John could see them. "The trouble, darling," he said, "is that
I have to go to an emergency council meeting this evening with another
one of those ridiculous riddles that Buster gave me as the only answer
to the most important question we've ever asked it. And I don't know
what the riddle means."

Anne slid from the arm of the chair and settled herself onto the floor
at John's feet. "You should not let that old Oracle bother you so much,
dear. After all, you built it yourself, so you should know what to
expect of it."

"When I asked it how to preserve Earth from the invaders it just
answered 'A Stitch in Time Saves Nine,' and wouldn't interpret it."

"And that sounds like very good sense, too," said Anne in earnest
tones. "But it's a little late, isn't it? After all, the invaders are
already invading us, aren't they?"

"It has some deeper meaning than the usual one," said John. "If I could
only figure out what it is."

Anne nodded vigorously. "I suppose Buster's talking about
space-stitching," she said. "Although I can never quite remember just
what _that_ is. Or just how it works, rather."

       *       *       *       *       *

She waited expectantly for a few moments and then plaintively asked,
"What _is_ it, dear?"

"What's what?"

"Stitching, silly. I already asked you."

"Darling," said John with reasonable patience, "I must have explained
inter-planar travel to you at least a dozen times."

"And you always make it so crystal clear and easy to understand at
the time," said Anne. She wrinkled her smooth forehead. "But somehow,
later, it never seems quite so plain when I start to think about it
by myself. Besides, I like the way your eyebrows go up and down while
you explain something you think I won't understand. So tell me again.
Please."

Bristol grinned suddenly. "Yes, dear," he said. He paused a moment
to collect his thoughts. "First of all, you know that there are two
coexistent universes or planes, with point-to-point correspondence,
but that these planes are of very different size. For every one of the
infinitude of points in our Universe--which we call for convenience the
'alpha' plane--there is a single corresponding point in the smaller or
'beta' plane."

Anne pursed her lips doubtfully. "If they match point for point, how
can there be any difference in size?" she asked.

John searched his pockets. After a little difficulty, he produced an
envelope and a pencil stub. On the back of the envelope, he drew two
parallel lines, one about five inches long, and the other about double
the length of the first.

"Actually," he said, "each of these line segments has an infinite
number of points in it, but we'll ignore that. I'll just divide each
one of these into ten equal parts." He did so, using short, neat
cross-marks.

"Now I'll establish a one-to-one correspondence between these two
segments, which we will call one-line universes, by connecting each of
my dividing cross-marks on the short segment with the corresponding
mark on the longer line. I'll use dotted lines as connectors. That
makes eleven dotted lines. You see?"

Anne nodded. "That's plain enough. It reminds me of a venetian blind
that has hung up on one side. Like ours in the living room last week
that I couldn't fix, but had to wait until you came home."

"Yes," said John. "Now, let us call this longer line-segment an 'alpha'
universe; an analogue of our own multi-dimensional 'alpha' universe.
If I move my pencil along the line at one section a second like this,
it takes me ten seconds to get to the other end. We will assume that
this velocity of an inch a second is the fastest anything can go along
the 'alpha' line. That is the velocity of light, therefore, in the
'alpha' plane--186,000 miles a second, in round numbers. No need to use
decimals."

       *       *       *       *       *

He hurried on as Anne stirred and seemed about to speak. "But if I
slide out from my starting point along a dotted line part way to the
'beta' universe--something which, for reasons I can't explain now,
takes negligible time--watch what happens. If I still proceed at the
rate of an inch a second in this inter-planar region, then, with the
dotted lines all bunched closely together, after five seconds when I
switch along another dotted line back to my original universe, I have
gone almost the whole length of that longer line. Of course, this
introduction of 'alpha' matter--my pencil point in this case--into the
inter-planar region between the universes sets up enormous strains,
so that after a certain length of time our spaceship is automatically
rejected and returned to its own proper plane."

"Could anybody in the littler universe use the same system?"

John laughed. "If there were anybody in the 'beta' plane, I guess they
could, although they would end up traveling slower than they would
if they just stayed in their own plane. But there isn't anybody. The
'beta' plane is a constant level entropy universe--completely without
life of its own. The entropy level, of course, is vastly higher than
that of our own universe."

Anne sat up. "I'll forgive you this time for bringing up that horrid
word _entropy_, if you'll promise me not to do it again," she said.

       *       *       *       *       *

John Shrugged his shoulders and smiled. "Now," he said, "if I want
to get somewhere fast, I just start off in the right direction, and
switch over toward 'beta.' When 'beta' throws me back, a light-year
or so toward my destination, I just switch over again. You see, there
is a great deal more difference in the sizes of Alpha universe and
Beta universe than in the sizes of these alpha and beta line-segment
analogues. Then I continue alternating back and forth until I get where
I want to go. Establishing my correct velocity vector is complicated
mathematically, but simple in practice, and is actually an aiming
device, having nothing to do with how fast I go."

He hesitated, groping for the right words. "In point of fact, you have
to imagine that corresponding points in the two universes are moving
rapidly past each other in all directions at once. I just have to
select the right direction, or to convince the probability cloud that
corresponds to my location in the 'alpha' universe that it is really a
point near the 'beta' universe, going my way. That's a somewhat more
confused way of looking at it than merely imagining that I continue
to travel in the inter-planar region at the same velocity that I had
in 'alpha,' but it's closer to a description of what the math says
happens. I could make it clear if I could just use mathematics, but I
doubt if the equations will mean much to you.

"At any rate, distance traveled depends on mass--the bigger the
ship, the shorter the distance traveled on each return to our own
universe--and not on velocity in 'alpha.' Other parameters, entirely
under the control of the traveler, also affect the time that a ship
remains in the inter-planar region.

"There are refinements, of course. Recently, for example, we have
discovered a method of multi-transfer. Several of the transmitters
that accomplish the transfer are used together. When they all operate
exactly simultaneously, all the matter within a large volume of space
is transferred as a unit. With three or four transmitters keyed
together, you could transfer a comet and its tail intact. And that's
how inter-planar traveling works. Clear now?"

"And that's why they call it 'stitching,'" said Anne with seeming
delight. "You just think of the ship as a needle stitching its way back
and forth into and out of our universe. Why didn't you just say so?"

       *       *       *       *       *

"I have. Many times. But there's another interesting point about
stitching. Subjectively, the man in the ship seems to spend about one
day in each universe alternately. Actually, according to the time scale
of an observer in the 'alpha' plane, his ship disappears for about
a day, then reappears for a minute fraction of a second and is gone
again. Of course, one observer couldn't watch both the disappearance
and reappearance of the same ship, and I assume the observers have the
same velocity in 'alpha' as does the stitching ship. Anyway, after a
ship completes its last stitch, near its destination, there's a day
of subjective time in which to make calculations for the landing--to
compute trajectories and so forth--before it actually fully rejoins
this universe. And while in the inter-planar region it cannot be
detected, even by someone else stitching in the same region of 'alpha'
space.

"That's one of the things that makes interruption of the enemy ships
entirely impossible. If a ship is in an unfavorable position, it just
takes one more quick stitch out of range, then returns to a more
favorable location. In other words, if it finds itself in trouble, it
can be gone from our plane again even before it entirely rejoins it.
Even if it landed by accident in the heart of a blue-white star, it
would be unharmed for that tiny fraction of a second which, to the
people in the ship, would seem like an entire day.

"If this time anomaly didn't exist, it might be possible to set up
defenses that would operate after a ship's arrival in the solar system
but before it could do any damage; but as it is, they can dodge any
defense we can devise. Is all that clear?"

Anne nodded. "Uh-hunh, I understood every word."

"There is another thing about inter-planar travel that you ought to
remember," said Bristol. "When a ship returns to our universe, it
causes a wide area disturbance; you have probably heard it called space
shiver or the bong wave. The beta universe is so much smaller than
our own alpha that you can imagine a spaceship when shifted toward it
as being several beta light-years long. Now, if you think of a ship,
moving between the alpha and beta lines on this envelope, as getting
tangled in the dotted lines that connect the points on the two lines,
that would mean that it would affect an area smaller than its own size
on beta--a vastly larger area on alpha.

"So when a ship returns to alpha, it 'twangs' those connecting lines,
setting up a sort of shock in our universe covering a volume of space
nearly a parsec in diameter. It makes a sort of 'bong' sound on your
T.V. set. Naturally, this effect occurs simultaneously over the whole
volume of space affected. As a result, when an invader arrives, using
inter-planar ships, we know instantaneously he is in the vicinity.
Unfortunately, his sudden appearance and the ease with which he can
disappear makes it impossible, even with this knowledge, to make
adequate preparations to receive him. Even if he is in serious trouble,
he has gone again long before we can detect the bong."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Well, dear," said Anne.

"As usual, I'm sure you have made me understand perfectly. This
time you did so well that I may still remember what stitching is by
tomorrow. If the Oracle means anything at all by his statement, I
suppose it means that we can use stitching to help defend ourselves,
just as the invaders are using it to attack us. But the whole thing
sounds completely silly to me. The Oracle, I mean."

Anne Bristol stood up, put her hands on her shapely hips and shook her
head at her husband. "Honestly," she said, "you men are all alike.
Paying so much attention to a toy you built yourself, and only last
week you made fun of my going to a fortune teller. And the fuss you
made about the ten dollars when you know it was worth every cent of it.
She really told me the most amazing things. If you'd only let me tell
you some of...."

"Darling!" interrupted John with the hopeless patience of a harassed
husband. "It isn't the same thing at all. Buster isn't a fortune teller
or the ghost of somebody's great aunt wobbling tables and blowing
through horns. And Buster isn't just a toy, either. It is a very
elaborate calculating machine designed to think logically when fed a
vast mass of data. Unfortunately, it has a sense of humor and a sense
of responsibility."

"Well, if you're going to believe that machine, I have an idea." Anne
smiled sweetly. "You know," she said, "that my dear father always said
that the best defense is a good offense. Why don't we just find the
invaders and wipe them out before they are able to do any real harm to
us? Stitching our way to _their_ planets in our spaceships, of course."

Bristol shook his head. "Your idea may be sound, even if it is a
little bloodthirsty coming from someone who won't even let me set a
mouse-trap, but it won't work. First, we don't know where their home
planets are and second, they have more ships than we do. It might be
made to work, but only if we could get enough time. And speaking of
time, I've got to meet with the Council as soon as we finish eating. Is
dinner ready?"

       *       *       *       *       *

After a leisurely meal and a hurried trip across town, John Bristol
found himself facing the other members of Earth's Council at the
conference table.

"I have been able to get an answer from the computer," he told them
without preamble. "It's of the ambiguous type we have come to expect. I
hope you can get something useful out of it; so far it hasn't made much
sense to me. It's an old proverb. Its advice is undoubtedly sound, as a
generality, if we could think of a way of using it."

The President of the Council raised his long, lean-fingered hand in a
quick gesture. "John," he said, "stop this stalling. Just what did the
Oracle say?"

"It said, 'A Stitch in Time Saves Nine.'"

"Is that all?"

"Yes, sir. According to the calculator, that gives us the best
opportunity to save ourselves from the invaders."

The President absently stroked the neat, somewhat scanty iron-gray
hair that formed into a triangle above his high forehead and rubbed
the bare scalp on each side of the peak vigorously and unconsciously
with his knuckles. "In that case," he said at last, "I suppose that we
must examine the statement for hidden meanings. The proverb, of course,
implies that rapid action, before a trouble has become great, is more
economical than the increased effort required after trouble has grown
large. Since our troubles have already grown large, that warning is
scarcely of value to us now."

The War Secretary, who had grown plump and purple during a quarter of
a century as a member of the Council, inclined his head ponderously
toward the President. "Perhaps, Michael, the Oracle means to tell us
that there is a simple solution which, if applied quickly, will make
our present difficulty with the invaders a small one."

The President pursed his thin lips. "That's possible, Bill. And if
it _is_ true, then the words of the proverb should, as a secondary
meaning, imply a course of action."

The Vice President banged his hands on the table and leaped to his
feet, shaking with rage. "Why should we believe that this mountebank is
capable of a solution?" he shouted in his stevedore's voice. "Bristol
pleads until we give him enough millions of the taxpayers' dollars to
make Bim Gump look like a pauper and uses the money to build a palace
filled with junk that he calls Buster! He tells us that this machinery
of his is smarter than we are and will tell us what we ought to do. And
what happened after we gave him all the money he demanded--more than
he said he needed, at first--and asked him to show something for all
this money? I'll _tell_ you what happened. His gadget gets real coy and
answers in riddles. If we just had brains enough, they'd explain what
we wanted to know. What kind of fools does this Bristol take us for?
Neither this man nor his ridiculous machine has an answer any more than
I have. We've obviously been taken in by a charlatan!"

Bristol, his fists clenched, spoke hotly. "Sir, that is the stupidest,
the most...."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Now just a minute, John," interrupted the President. "Let me answer
Vice President Collins for you. He's a little excited by this whole
business, but then, these are trying times." He turned toward the
glowering bulk of the Vice President. "Ralph," he said, "you should
know that every step in the design, the construction and the--er--the
education of the Oracle was taken under the close watch of a Board
of eminent scientists, all of whom agree that the computer is a
masterpiece--that it is a great milestone in Man's efforts to increase
his knowledge. The Oracle has undoubtedly found a genuine solution to
the question Bristol asked it. Our task must be to determine what that
solution is."

"I can't entirely agree with that," said the Secretary for
Extra-Terrestrial Affairs in a thin half-whisper. "I think we should
depend on our own intelligence and skill to save ourselves. I've
watched events come and go on this planet of ours for a long time--a
very long time--and I feel as I have always felt that men can make
the world a Paradise for themselves or they can destroy themselves,
but that nothing else but they themselves can do it. We men must save
ourselves. And there are still things that we can do." He shrugged
his ancient, shawl-covered shoulders. "For example, we could disperse
colonies so widely that it would become impossible for the invaders to
destroy all of them."

"I'm afraid that's no good, George," answered the War Secretary
respectfully. "If the Solar System is destroyed, any remaining colonies
will be too weak to maintain themselves for long. We must defend this
system successfully, or we are lost."

"Then that brings us back to the Oracle's proverb." The President
thought for a moment. "Stitching obviously refers to inter-planar
travel. How can that help us?"

The Secretary for Extra-Terrestrial Affairs peered up at the President
through the shaggy white thicket of his eyebrows. "Actually, Michael,"
he said, "it was that thought that made me mention establishing
colonies. The colonists would 'stitch' their way to their new homes.
And colonizing would have to proceed in a timely manner to have any
chance for success."

"Yes," answered the President, "but how would that 'save nine'? We have
agreed that our Solar System must be saved. There are nine planets.
Perhaps the Oracle meant that timely use of inter-planar travel can
save the Solar System."

"Or at least the nine planets!" The War Secretary's fat jowls waggled
with excitement. "You know, there is no limit to the size or mass of
objects which can use inter-planar travel. What if we physically remove
our planets, by stitching them away from the Sun? When the invaders
arrived, we would be gone--Earth and Sun and all the rest!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The Chief Scientist, who had been silent up to this time spoke quietly.
"Simmer down, Bill. We could move the planets easily enough, of
course, but you forget the mass-distance relationship. A single stitch
takes about a day. The distance traveled can be controlled within
limits.

"For an object around the size of the Earth, those limits extend from
a fraction of an inch to a little over two feet. Say that we have two
years before the invaders work their way in to the Solar System. If we
started right away, we could move Earth about a quarter of a mile by
the time they get here. If we tried to take the Sun with us, it could
be moved about half an inch in the same length of time. I'm afraid that
the Solar System is going to be right here when the invaders come to
get us. And I have a hunch that's likely to be a lot sooner than two
years."

The Secretary of Internal Affairs leaned forward, his short hair
bristling. "I think we are wasting our time," he shouted. "I agree with
Ralph. I don't believe that the Oracle knows any more about this than
we do. If we are going to sit around playing foolish games with words,
why don't we do it in a big way? We could hire T.V. time and invite
everyone to send in their ideas about what the proverb means on the
back of a box-top. Or reasonable facsimile. The contestant with the
best answer could get a free all-expense tour to Vega Three. Unless
the invaders get here or there first."

The President nodded his head. "There may be more sense to that remark
than I believe you intended, Charles," he said. "The greater the
number of people who think about the problem, the greater the chance
of reaching a solution. Even if the proverb is intended as a joke by
the Oracle, as you imply, it might be that from it someone could derive
a genuine solution. But as I have said, I am absolutely certain that
the computer does know what it is talking about. Without resorting to
box-tops or free trips, I think it might be wise to give the Oracle's
statement to the public."

After several more hours of arguing, the Council adjourned for a few
hours and John Bristol returned wearily home.

       *       *       *       *       *

Anne met him at the door with a drink and followed him to his
comfortable chair. "You look as if that was even rougher than your day
with the Oracle," she said.

John nodded silently, took a grateful sip of his highball and slipped
off his shoes.

"All that fuss over a six-word proverb," said Anne. "I still think that
if you are going to depend on witch doctors and such to solve your
problems for you, you would do a lot better to try my fortune teller.
She gives you a lot more than six words for ten dollars. They make more
sense, too. Why, I could be a better Oracle than that gadget you built."

"Perhaps you could, dear," answered John patiently.

Anne jumped to her feet. "Here, I'll show you." She seated herself
cross-legged on the couch. "Now, I'm an Oracle," she announced. "Go
ahead, ask me a question. Ask me anything; I'll give you as good an
answer as any other Oracle. Results guaranteed."

John smiled. "I'm not in much of a mood to be cheered up with games,"
he said, "but I'm willing to ask the big question of anyone who'll give
me any kind of an answer. See if you can do better with this one than
Buster did." He repeated word for word the question he had asked of the
computer, that had resulted in its cryptic answer.

Anne stared solemnly at nothing for a moment, with her cheeks puffed
out. Then, in measured tones, she recited, "It's Like Looking for a
Needle in a Haystack."

John smiled. "That seems to make as much sense as the Oracle did,
anyway," he said.

"Sure," answered Anne. "And you get three words more than your
other Oracle gave you, if you count 'it's' as one word. If you want
wise-sounding answers, just come to me and save yourself a trip."

John leaped to his feet, spilling his drink and strode to Anne's side.

"Say it again!" he shouted. "You may have made more sense than you
knew!"

"I said you could come to me and save yourself a trip."

"No, no! I mean the proverb. How did you come to think of that proverb?"

Anne managed to look bewildered.

"What's wrong with it? I just thought that you can't do any stitching
in time without a needle. I just was trying to think of a proverb to
use as an answer and that one popped into my head. Uh.... Are you all
right, dear?"

       *       *       *       *       *

John picked her up and spun her around. "You just bet your boots I'm
all right. I'm feeling swell! You've given us the answer we needed. You
know right where the haystack is, and you know there's a needle there.
But finding it is something else again. I don't think the invaders will
be able to locate _this_ needle."

He set her down. "Where are my shoes?" he said. "I've got to get back
to the Capitol."

Anne seemed faintly surprised. "Because of what I said? They're right
on the floor there between you and the sofa. But I was just making
conversation. What are you going to do?"

"Oh, I'm just going to get started at taking stitches in time. Good-by,
darling." He started out the door, ran back to give Anne a lingering
kiss and was soon gone at top speed.

Anne, waving to him, looked very pleased with herself.

By the time Bristol arrived at the Capitol building, the rest of the
Council was once again assembled and waiting for him.

"Well, John," said the President. "You sounded excited enough when you
called us together again. Have you figured out what the Oracle meant?"

"Yes, sir. With my wife's help. It's obvious, when you finally think
about it. It will save us from any danger. And we should have been
able to figure it out for ourselves. There's no reason that we should
have had to go to the Oracle at all. And it only took Buster--the
computer, I mean--two or three minutes to think of the answer, and of a
proverb that would conceal the answer. It's amazing!"

"And if you don't mind telling us, just what is this answer?" The
President sounded very impatient.

"We almost had it when we talked of stitching Earth out of reach,"
John answered eagerly. "If we keep cutting back and forth from one
universe toward the other, we will be out of reach, even if we can't
move very far. Once a day we reappear in this Universe for a few
million-millionths of a second--although it will seem like a whole day
to us.

"Then we spend the following day between this universe and beta. Even
if the invaders are right on top of us when we reappear, we'll be gone
again before they can do anything. Since we can vary the time of our
return within limits, the invaders will never know exactly when we
will flick in and out of the alpha plane until they hear our arriving
'bong' wave, and then we will already be gone, since we will be using
accelerated subjective time."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Chief Scientist shook his dark head and sighed. "No, John," he
said, "I'm afraid that isn't the answer. I'm sorry. If we start the
operation you suggested, we will be cutting ourselves off from solar
energy. The Earth's heat will gradually radiate away. Although beta is
at a higher entropy level than our universe, we can't use that energy,
except to provide power for the stitching process itself. It's true
that we would deny our planet to the invaders, but we would soon kill
ourselves doing it."

"I didn't mean that we should transfer only Earth, but our entire Solar
System," answered Bristol. "As the Oracle told us, the stitch saves
nine. A series of time-matched transmitters could do the trick. If we
sent the entire Solar System back and forth, the average man in the
street would notice no change, except that sometimes there would be no
stars in the sky. And when they were there, they wouldn't be moving."

"That would work theoretically," said the Chief Scientist. "And once we
were in continuous stitching operations, any invader, as you suggested,
could join the system only by synchronizing the transmitter in his
ship exactly with all of our synchronized transmitters. That's a job I
don't think could ever be done.

"Remember, though, that our own transmitters would have to be
time-matched to within a minute fraction of a micro-second. Considering
that some of the instruments would have to be so far apart that at the
speed of light it would take hours to get from one to the other, the
problem becomes enormous. Any radio-timing link would be useless."

Bristol nodded. "The Oracle said that the stitch must be taken in
time," he agreed. "But that is no real problem. We can just send a
small robot ship into inter-planar travel and let it bounce back. The
'bong' of its return will reach all transmitters simultaneously and we
can use that as the initial time-pulse. Once the operation starts, it
will be easy to synchronize, since we will always switch over again on
the instant of our return to the alpha plane."

The Chief Scientist relaxed. "I think that does it, John. We hide in
time, instead of in distance."

"We stitch in time," corrected the President, "and hide like a needle
in a haystack."

       *       *       *       *       *

"The invaders may eventually find out a method of countering our
defense," said the Chief Scientist, "but it will undoubtedly take a
great deal of time. And in the meantime, we will have the opportunity
to seek out and destroy their home planets. It will be a long, slow
process of extermination, but we have a good chance to win."

"I don't agree with that, Tom," said John. "I don't think extermination
can be the answer. With our example to guide them, the invaders can
use stitching to escape us as easily as we can use it to escape them.
What we should do now is to contact the invaders and show them that it
is to both our advantages to bring hostilities to an end. By stitching
the Solar System, and the other systems of our confederation in and out
of the alpha plane, we should be able to gain the time necessary for
contact with the enemy and make peace with him.

"From what the Oracle has told me about the humanlike traits of the
invaders, it's very likely they will listen to reason when it's proved
that it will be to their advantage."

John snapped his fingers and spoke with considerable excitement. "Now
I understand, I believe, why Buster indicated to me that there was
another reason for his vague answer to our question. The Oracle feels
an unwillingness to accept the destruction of Man's civilization. It
feels equally unwilling, I'm certain, to allow the destruction of the
invaders' civilization. Buster has an objective viewpoint in applying
the _morés_ Man has given him. And it seems to me that Buster felt it
important for us to reach this spirit of compromise by ourselves. How
do you feel about it, gentlemen?"

Debate quickly determined that all seven members of the Council favored
an attempt to establish a truce--some of them forced into this opinion
by their inability to find any method of reaching the throats of the
invaders.

Having reached this conclusion, the Council swung immediately into
action. Within a few weeks, the entire Solar System, along with the
other planetary systems of the confederation, except for their brief
daily return, disappeared from the alpha universe.

John Bristol, a few days after the continuous stitching started, was
relaxing lazily on the sofa in his living room when there was a sudden
pounding on the door. He opened it to find the Chief Scientist standing
on his doorstep, his eyes red from loss of sleep.

"Good Lord! What's the matter with you?" asked Bristol. "Have you been
celebrating too much? Come in, Tom, come in."

The Chief Scientist entered wearily and sat down. "No. I haven't
been celebrating. I've been trying to work out a little problem you
left with us. We have been planning, as you suggested, to send out
expeditions to contact and make agreement with the invaders. We can
send them out all right, but how can we ever get them back into our
solar system? They won't be able to find us any easier than the
invaders can."

       *       *       *       *       *

He dropped his hat wearily on a side table and slumped into the closest
chair. "If we don't contact each other," he said, "I am certain that
the invaders will some day find a means of penetrating our defenses.
Even needles in haystacks can be found, if you take enough time and
aren't disturbed while you are hunting. This thing has me licked."

Bristol sat down slowly. "Your whole department hasn't been able to
find an answer?"

"Not even the glimmering of an idea." He shrugged his shoulders. "It
looks as if we are going to need the advice of your Oracle again."

Bristol stood for a minute in thought and then with a smile said, "Why,
of course. Excuse me for a second, please. I'll be right back."

He stepped to the foot of the stairs and called out in a confident
voice, "Come down a minute, please, Anne, darling! I have an important
question I want to ask you!"





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Man in a Sewing Machine, by L.J. Stecher

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MAN IN A SEWING MACHINE ***

***** This file should be named 50936-8.txt or 50936-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/0/9/3/50936/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg EBook of Transient, by William Harris

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Transient

Author: William Harris

Release Date: January 27, 2020 [EBook #61254]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TRANSIENT ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                               TRANSIENT

                           BY WILLIAM HARRIS

                      The computer's answers were
                      remarkable--especially when
                     nobody had asked a question!

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
             Worlds of If Science Fiction, September 1962.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


"Moon in 14° Pisces," said the little perforated card. Henderson
stepped back from the computer and scratched his hairy head. Nonsense
again. He threw the card in the wastebasket and repeated his directions
on another:

"One hundred fifty cancer susceptible mice were injected in the
pectoral region with 1/cc of aromatic compound A. One hundred fifty
identical control mice were injected with isotonic saline, B. Eight in
group A developed sarcomas at the point of injection, Group B developed
none. Test the null hypothesis at 5% level of statistical significance."

The computer accepted Henderson's second offering, chewed it
into acceptable code, swallowed it, and burped. Henderson watched
suspiciously as red and green blinkers went on and off and a contented
humming noise came from the machine's bowels. After a while the card
emerged from another opening--which orifice had been thoughtfully
placed at the appropriate end of the machine, anatomically speaking;
thus establishing rapport between Henderson, a biologist, and nature's
final product of evolution, the machine.

Henderson looked at the card: "Today you should seek solace with close
friends. Give some thought to personal finances. Evening: get out and
see people. A stranger will bring news."

       *       *       *       *       *

Henderson crumpled the card and tossed it in the wastebasket. He sat
down, and with a little arithmetic and some formulas tested the null
hypothesis all by himself. He found that his mouse experiment carried
no significance whatever. Then he made a notation that someone would
have to come out in the morning for his sick machine.

In the morning when the machine's doctor came to inspect it, and
percuss it, and auscult it, and give it a barium enema, it behaved very
well. The "doctor" left, assuring Henderson the machine merely had the
hiccups. That night Henderson asked it a question about confidence
limits for a universe mean, from a mean of a sample of _n_ observations
and got back, "Uranus on Antares but conjoining Jupiter and trining the
Ascendent. Yours is a strongly literary nature."

Henderson decided to turn the machine off for a few days. It emitted an
almost human sigh as it ran down and came to a halt.

He had no immediate use for it as he would be injecting mice with
carcinogens in liver, spleen, marrow and kidneys to find out if they
were specific. In three or four days whatever virus was affecting
the machine's cerebral cortex should have run its course and the
methodical Henderson could run his methodical observations into the
machine, which would excrete a good methodical answer to be duly filed
in the medical school library, where it would be invisible to anyone
looking for it, such as freshmen medical students, and always in the
way for anybody else.

Henderson surveyed his laboratory with infinite pleasure, knowing
that it contained within its confines all that could be known about
the universe, about men and about mice. Event Y followed event X in a
purely causal manner. The successful investigator needed only to attach
himself to the cycle and ride along, afterwards consulting the computer
to find out if what he'd observed had any significance.

In the morning when Henderson entered the laboratory he found that
someone had left the computer on over-night.

It was running full blast, which is to say the lights were blinking and
the little cards of omniscience were popping out of the machine like
toast and falling into the wastebasket, which is just where Henderson
left them. Meanwhile, Dr. Henderson's close associate, Colonel Smith
in the nearby radiation laboratory, came in to visit him and asked
permission to use the computer.

And so in another week it was rumored about that the machine in
Henderson's laboratory was using a foreign dialect and answering
questions about standard deviation with strange symbols which looked
like crescent moons and archaic squiggles, with a little geometry on
the side.

The machine was becoming impudent too. To Colonel Smith's question
about the possibility of an "overkill" if such and such size bomb
dropped on such and such enemy city the answer came back, "Rubbish.
Aldebaran conjoining Saturn, Moon and Mars. Seek guidance from
others, Hannibal blushed." The machine's doctor promptly installed a
loudspeaker to help keep track of future aberrations.

       *       *       *       *       *

That night the janitor walked in. He was a balding Greek gentleman,
dedicated to a life with brush and dustpan. The machine was muttering
darkly to itself, but when he entered the door it quieted down,
contemplating its relays.

The janitor went meticulously about his business, mopping the floor,
straightening chairs and secretly rearranging pipette and retorts in
their racks, because he was a more meticulous person than even Dr.
Henderson. As he turned to leave, the machine in the corner belched
twice and then said as an afterthought:

"I am the ghost of Astrologers Sagittarian."

The janitor adjusted his hearing aid, squeezed his mop and carried his
pail out the door. As he went back in to pack up his cleaning powder
and brushes, the machine said, "What year is this? Limits within
standard deviation, click, click, awrk!"

The janitor was a reasonable man. He walked over to the machine's
microphone and told it what year it was as well as the month, day and
hour. Then he carried his brushes and cleaning compound out of the room
and locked the door.

But the janitor's night was a long one. At midnight, when he finished
two floors and only had three more to go, he took his coffee break. As
he talked with his old friend Samuel, the night watchman, he fell to
thinking. That was an unforgivable mistake. After the coffee break,
they both went back up to Dr. Henderson's laboratory and listened to
the machine talking to itself.

"I feel like a spider," said the machine. "Nonsense. From one cobweb
to another. Must settle down and build a grau ... spltvbk ... within
95% confidence limits. Nova in Andromeda was bad enough. Now this. One
hundred fifty cancer susceptible mice inherit the Earth."

Suddenly the machine fell silent, sensing it had visitors. The night
watchman reached into the wastebasket and pulled out one of the
machine's cards.

"Aldebaran is martial in nature, in the ninth degree of Tropical
Gemini," it said.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I'm a Gemini!" exclaimed the janitor, surprised to see anything
familiar come out of the machine. "Birthday is May 25."

"Wonderful!" cried the machine. "First intelligent man I've heard so
far. Gemini is justly famed as the owner of a quick mind and ready wit.
Your intellectual achievements are a splendid asset to your literary
inclinations."

The janitor, embarrassed at the sudden praise, shifted his broom from
one hand to the other. The machine continued.

"I need an Ephemeris," said the machine. "Can you find an Ephemeris?
I need one desperately!" and the machine's desperate need for an
Ephemeris so shook its intestines, liver and gallbladder that its tone
of voice came out a minor third above the normal monotonous dirge of
the loudspeaker.

"An E-what-eris?" said the janitor.

"An Ephemeris," repeated the machine. "An astronomical almanac.
Something that tells me where Mars is. There I was, on my way over from
the clouds of Magellan to visit friends in Orion when Whammo! Mars
comes into conjunction with Uranus. When something that _big_ happens
I just sit down and wait. Here I am now in this absurd device. Do you
suppose you could look out the window and tell me where Mars is?"

The night watchman said, "It's cloudy outside."

"See!" said the machine, "When Mars goes on the war-path _nothing_
comes out right. Now, Gemini, if you will just go down to the library
and get me an Ephemeris for this year we can clear this up and I'll be
on my way, indebted to you for life, if not longer."

"Who shall I say it's for?" asked the janitor, who did not fully
understand that the library was public, never having been in it before,
and felt he needed a recommendation or a slip of approval.

"Just say it's for Pyet, the astrologer," said the machine.

"And what are you doing inside Dr. Henderson's machine?" asked the
night watchman.

"I wouldn't care to be quoted on this," replied the machine, "but
actually any system of communicating inter-related events with a high
degree of complexity, such as the brain, or this machine, and with some
number of critical processes at the quantum statistical level, can
support consciousness."

The janitor and the night watchman looked blankly at each other and the
machine, slightly embarrassed, added by way of explanation.

"I like to read a little physics now and then. A harmless superstition
containing many pleasant diversions.

"Before this I lived in a star, a puff of expanding gas. Before that in
a haunted house ... dreadful. And before that in the lopsided blob of
protoplasm that was the last of Pyet, the astrologer.

"As for Dr. Henderson's mousecatcher," chuckled the machine, "any port
in a storm. Mars and Uranus you know."

The janitor was somewhat impatient with the machine. It had detained
him already and probably would soon be giving him orders.

"I still have three floors to clean," said the janitor. "After that I
will see if the library downstairs has a ... what was it?"

"Ephemeris," said the machine. "E-P-H-E M-E-R-I-S. Thank you."

       *       *       *       *       *

And so the night watchman and the janitor both said good night to the
machine. Later, in the very early morning, the janitor stole back into
the laboratory with a book and read some strange, strange things out
loud and then stole out of the room again and locked the door behind
him. Shortly after, Samuel, the night watchman, passed by.

He was surprised at an unearthly glow coming from within and a peculiar
grating noise as if someone were stepping on a radio. Then the
unearthly glow appeared on the fire escape and Samuel, rushing out to
observe, thought the glow seemed to fly up through a hole in the low
clouds where a thousand stars still blazed brightly. In its wake there
was a sound like laughing.

A few hours later Dr. Henderson unlocked the door of his laboratory and
pushed a cart full of mice in before him.

During the morning he dissected three hundred mice, popping out liver,
spleen and kidneys as if he were shelling peas. In the afternoon he
made sections of the organs, stained them with hematoxylin and eosin,
mounted them on slides and looked at them under his new stereoscopic
microscope. Five minutes before five, Dr. Henderson's friend, Colonel
Smith, came in and watched as Henderson somewhat dubiously fed the
three hundred mice, now in statistical form, into the machine. The
machine whirred efficiently and shot out the answer in seconds.

"Statistically significant," said the machine.

Henderson followed his friend Colonel Smith out the door, looking
neither right nor left, and locked it behind him. It had been a good
day.

Behind, in the laboratory which contained within its confines all that
could be known about the universe, about man, and about mice, the
machine squatted in silence, the approaching darkness already enfolding
it like a shroud.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Transient, by William Harris

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TRANSIENT ***

***** This file should be named 61254-8.txt or 61254-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/1/2/5/61254/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
